The central question is where should the Plaintiffs \ ' claims be tried , in England , as the Plaintiffs contend , or in Spain , as the Defendants contend .
The Parties : The Kuwait Investment Office -LCB- \ ` KIO \ ' -RRB- is a branch of the Kuwait Investment Authority established in Kuwait and has as its function the management of investment of funds belonging to the Government of Kuwait .
KIO is based in London .
Grupo Torras is incorporated in Spain and is indirectly controlled by KIO .
He was served with the proceedings under RSC Order 11 in the Bahamas ; but the Judge held that he was domiciled in England and could have been served in England .
Messrs de la Rosa , Soler , Nunez , de Mir and Pique were together referred to as the \ ` Spanish Defendants \ ' , being domiciled in Spain .
Mr Robinson , Mr Jaffar and Mr Moukarzel were domiciled in England .
Mr Jaffar was Deputy Chairman and General Manager of KIO until 20 April 1990 , a director of Koolmees and Kokmeeuw until 15 March 1990 , and at all material times Vice-President and a director of Grupo Torras .
Mr Coll is an accountant of British nationality who lives in Spain .
Mr Russell is also an accountant ; he lives in Jersey and practices as a partner of Russell Limebeer .
Croesus International Ltd and Wantley Developments Ltd are Gibraltar companies provided by Mr Coll .
Wardbase Developments Ltd -LRB- an English company -RRB- , Oakthorn Ltd -LRB- a Jersey company -RRB- , Westow Ltd and Anslow Ltd -LRB- both Isle of Man companies -RRB- , were provided by or associated with Mr. Russell .
Croesus : In May 1988 Us $ 27.4 million at the request of Mr de la Rosa and Mr Jaffar was transferred by KIO to Grupo Torras .
In September 1989 , Banco Santander , at the request of Torras London , transferred US $ 25 million to Kokmeeuw in \ ` partial repayment \ ' of the transfer of US $ 27.4 million to the Republic National Bank .
It is then alleged that the payment was concealed by a series of sham documents and transactions , notably a sham loan agreement by Torras London to Croesus , with extensions , a guarantee of the \ ` loan \ ' signed by Mr Nunez on behalf of Grupo Torras .
Of the US $ 55 million , $ 7.5 million is said to have been traced to an account in Mr Jaffar \ 's name in a Bank in Zurich ; smaller sums to companies associated with Mr Russell .
As to the US $ 50 million , $ 10 million is said to have been traced to Mr Jaffar \ 's Zurich Bank , $ 22.5 million to an account controlled by Sheikh Fahad in a bank in London and $ 15.49 million to the account of a company in Jersey of which Mr Russell is a signatory and whose address is the same as Russell Limebeer .
Pincinco : Under a Fiduciary Agreement dated 2 October 1990 , Torras London through Banco Santander -LRB- Suiza -RRB- SA deposited US $ 300 million with Bankers Trust AG , Geneva and the latter agreed for a fee/commission of $ 2.1 million to make , and did an 3 October 1990 make , a loan of US $ 300 million to Pincinco at Torras London \ 's risk and expense .
Pincinco is a Jersey company now in liquidation of which Mr Russell was company secretary and now a liquidator .
The US $ 300 million was not intended to be repaid by Pincinco from its own funds and was not paid to Pincinco for the benefit of Grupo Torras or Torras London .
2 billion was transferred by Grupo Torras to Torras London in Barcelona and then by Torras London to an account in the name of Wardbase in London .
We find it difficult to see how it could properly have been argued at such length that there was no serious issue to be tried : -LRB- See Seaconsar v. Bank Markasi -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 AC 438 at p. 455 , where Lord Goff of Chieveley indicated that the issue of the merits should net be debated at length -RRB- .
The Defendants argued that , for the purposes of Article 21 , the parties to these Spanish criminal proceedings included Sheikh Fahad and messrs Jaffar , de la Rosa , de Mir , Nunez , Folchi and Soler .
On 19th May these proceedings were amended to add as plaintiffs messrs de la Rosa , de Mir , Nunez , Folchi and Soler and to claim declarations of regularity in relation to -LRB- among other things -RRB- the four transactions which by then were the subject of the English action .
Thus it was argued that England was not an appropriate forum and that Spain was the appropriate forum .
Chronology As previously stated , the application of these Articles requires that the court determine whether or not it is the court first seized , it is therefore helpful at the outset to list the dates upon which steps were taken in the relevant actions , this action in England and the criminal , guerelJa , proceedings and the Quail action in Spain .
9/6/92 Original Quail proceedings filed 26/1/33 Judge Moreiras orders the no-admission of the criminal proceedings on the application of Mr de la Rosa -RRB- 19/2/33 Judge Moreiras confirms non-admission of the criminal proceedings -LRB- `` after further intervention by Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar 14/4/93 English writ issued 15/4/93 English writ served within jurisdiction on Jaffar , Robinson , Moukarzel , Coll & Co. and Wardbase 7/5/33 Missing documentation lodged by Quail in original Quail proceedings 12/5/33 Original Quail proceedings admitted 17-8/5 / 93 English writ served on Anslow , Westow , Croesus , Wantley , Russell , Limebeer and Oakthorn 1P/5/93 Quail proceedings amended by adding de la Rosa , de Mir , Nunez , Folchi and Soler 21/5/93 -15 / 6/93 English writ served on Russell , Sheikh Fahad , Riquel and Coggia 18/6/93 Amended Quail proceedings admitted 21/6/93 English writ served on de la Rosa , de Mir , Soler , Coll and Folchi 3/7/93 Criminal proceedings again not admitted 1/10/93 Amended Quail proceedings served on Grupo Torras 1/10/93 English writ served on Pique 15/11/93 English writ served on Nunez 11/2/34 Audiencia National orders that the criminal proceedings be admitted -LSB- 29/4/34 Judge Foncillas stays the Quail proceedings pending the resolution of the criminal proceedings -RSB- The Expert Evidence of Spanish Law : A vast amount of evidence of Spanish law was adduced before the Judge .
However , where the evidence of an expert witness on foreign law is not contradicted , the Judge should be reluctant to reject it : -LRB- Sharif v Azad -LSB- 1967 -RSB- 1 QB 605 per Diplock LJ at p. 616B -RRB- .
But it should be extremely reluctant to substitute its own views where questions of credibility are concerned , since the Judge has had the benefit of seeing and hearing the witnesses : -LRB- Parkasho v Singh -LSB- 1968 -RSB- P 233 at p. 250 ; Dalmia Dairy Industries Ltd v National Bank of Pakistan -LSB- 1978 -RSB- 2 Lloyds 233 per Megaw LJ at p. 286 -RRB- .
It is accepted that his reason under -LRB- iv -RRB- can not stand and that it is still necessary to consider as between the parties common to both the criminal proceedings and the English action - Grupo Torras , Sheikh Fahad and Messrs de la Rosa , de Mir , Nunez , Folchi and Soler - whether Article 21 applies .
That case concerned the carriage on the vessel , the `` Tatry '' , of various consignments of soya bean oil which had been discharged at Rotterdam and Hamburg contaminated , it was said , by diesel oil .
Although it is accepted that the reasoning of Mance J can not , as such , stand with the judgment of the Court in Maciej Rataj , the arguments of the Respondents before us are substantially to the same effect and would , if accepted , lead to the same conclusion .
The Application of Article 21 , the Quail Action : For the purposes of Article 21 , the proceedings which are relevant are , in England , the present action and , in Spain , the \ ` Quail \ ' proceedings .
After the amendment of the Quail action , the parties who are common to the English action and to the amended Quail action are Grupo Torras and messrs de la Rosa , de Mir , Nunez , Folchi and Soler .
The matter was adjourned so that the Plaintiffs could decide whether they wished to continue the action against Mr. Nunez , in which case the Court would have to resolve the dispute as to the interpretation of Article 21 to which we have adverted .
It follows that for the purposes of Articles 21 and 22 of the Convention the Spanish courts did not become seized of the Quail proceedings as between the relevant parties until 1st October 1993 , that is to say , a date after the date upon which the English court had , on any view , became seized of the present action as between the relevant parties , which no longer includes Mr. Nunez and Mr. Pique because of the discontinuance of the action against them .
Accordingly the ground of appeal which was founded on the submission that as between Grupo Torras and the Quail Plaintiffs , other than Mr. Nunez , that is to say , de la Rosa , de Mir , Folchi and Soler , the Spanish court was the first seized , fails .
The facts in that case , either proved or assumed , were as follows : Macmillan -LRB- the 11th defendants in one of the present actions -RRB- were a wholly owned subsidiary of Maxwell Communications Corporation plc , a company owned partly by the public and partly by Mr Robert Maxwell and his family ; they had a majority holding in the shares of Berlitz ; those shares were transferred out of Macmillan \ 's name to Bishopsgate Investment Trust , who were owned and controlled by Mr Maxwell and his family ; and then the shares were pledged to secure the debts of companies in the private ownership of Mr Maxwell and his family .
As commonly happens the contracts were arranged in layers : first there was a contract with a limit of \ xc2 \ xa31 million , subscribed by New Hampshire Insurance Company alone ; above that there were a succession of layers up to the following totals - 1988/1989 \ xc2 \ xa325 million 1989/1990 \ xc2 \ xa335 million 1990/1991 \ xc2 \ xa350 million 1991/1992 \ xc2 \ xa350 million New Hampshire were the leading underwriters on all contracts , except for the top \ xc2 \ xa310 million layers in 1990/1991 and 1991/1992 , which were subscribed only by Chubb Insurance Company of Europe SA .
As has already been mentioned , in some of the Maxwell companies Mr Robert Maxwell and his family held a controlling interest but there was also ownership by the public ; others were owned by Mr Maxwell and his family alone .
In relation to that year Mr Ward of the Risk Management Department said this in his statement : \ t \ tTo the best of my knowledge I did not receive a copy of the Chubb excess layer wording for the subsequent policy year , namely , July 1991/June 1992 .
However , we were shown a letter dated 16th January 1991 , to New Hampshire from Miss Godwin of the policy division at Willis Wrightson .
We can not attribute much , or indeed any , weight to the fact that Mr Ward wrote `` checked & okay '' on the letter , and put the policy in the place where original policies were kept ; those were not circumstances which by inference conveyed acceptance to Chubb , since they did not know of them .
Mr Phillips in the course of his reply pointed out that it was and remains the pleaded case of the Claimants that the Chubb policy did form part of the contracts .
How then were they allowed to procure a preliminary issue from Waller J. , and to argue before Potter J. that the Chubb policy did not form part of the contracts .
The slips for Chubb in Year 3 and Year 4 had the same description of the insured , with very slight and immaterial variations , as the New Hampshire policies for those years .
We feel that we are relieved from the need to answer those questions by the authority of the House of Lords , in the passage already quoted from P. Samuel & Co Ltd v Dumas .
-LRB- a p. 510 -RRB- quoted from the judgment of Scrutton LJ in Leon v. Casey -LRB- 1932 -RRB- 2 KB 576 at p. 579 : \ t \ tThe origin of the order to ships \ ' papers goes back to the time of Lord Mansfield .
\ tWe now turn to the Niger case , first in the Court of Appeal before Bankes , Warrington and Atkin LJJ .
\ tIn our judgment that must also have been the view of the House of Lords in the Niger case -LRB- 1922 -RRB- 13 Ll.L .
-LSB- Clause 21 - Cargo gear -RSB- Owners shall maintain the cargo gear of the ship which is as follows : See Clause 55 -LSB- Clause 40 - Blacklisting -RSB- Owners guarantee vessel is neither blacklisted by United Arab Republic , Syria , or any other Arabian State , due to previous calls at Israel , nor blacklisted by US Authorities due to previous calls at Cuba ... -LSB- Clause 55 - Vessel \ 's description -RSB- ... -LSB- Clause 56 - Bunker -RSB- Vessel to be delivered with about 700mts HFO and about 100 mts MDO , and about Units MDO , and to be redelivered with approx .
JUSTICE NEUBERGER : INTRODUCTION This is an application by Mr Holland , the liquidator of Harvard Securities Limited -LRB- `` Harvard '' -RRB- , for directions under Section 112 of the Insolvency Act 1986 in relation to certain shares in Australian and United States companies held by Harvard .
\ r \ n Between 1980 and 1986 Harvard purchased shares in various Australian and US companies -LRB- `` the Australian shares '' and `` the US shares '' respectively -RRB- and sold them on to clients .
\ r \ n When Harvard purchased a block of Australian or US shares with a view to selling them on to clients in parcels of shares , it was its practice not to register each of the parcel of shares in the name of the relevant client .
In these circumstances , I think the right basis upon which I should proceed is to assume that such communications as I have seen passing between Harvard and its clients relating to the acquisition , sale and holding of the Australian and US shares are typical , and indeed representative , of such communications passing between Harvard and its clients .
Since 1986 , all the Australian shares have been held in the name of ANZ Nominees -LRB- `` ANZ '' -RRB- , a subsidiary of Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited , and the share certificates have always been held in Melbourne , Australia .
ANZ accepts that , as against Harvard , it is no more than a mere nominee for Harvard ; ANZ has agreed to be bound by any order which the court makes in these proceedings .
The sale would be recorded by Harvard by way of book entry , and the share certificate , in respect of the whole block of shares , would remain in the name and physical possession of ANZ in Australia .
They are registered in the name of the English Association of American Bond and Shareholders Limited -LRB- `` the Association '' -RRB- , which accepts that it is a mere nominee for Harvard ; like ANZ in relation to the Australian shares , the Association agrees to be bound by whatever decision the court makes in these proceedings .
The share certificates for the US shares were held in London by a bank to Harvard \ 's order , and are now held at the liquidator \ 's London offices .
On occasion , Harvard wrote to clients `` regarding your purchase of -LSB- certain US -RSB- shares '' and stated that `` in order to save on transaction costs these shares are being held to your order under a nominee name '' .
Harvard similarly wrote to clients referring to the US shares as `` your shares '' .
\ r \ n Harvard \ 's internal records in relation to the US shares were very similar to that relating to the Australian shares .
In these proceedings , the liquidator seeks the determination of the court as to whether Harvard or the former clients of Harvard has the beneficial interest in the Australian shares and the US shares .
Harvard has sufficient US shares and Australian shares to account to all its former clients in respect of their beneficial interests -LRB- if any -RRB- in such shares .
I proceed on the assumption that each of the Australian and US companies maintained their share register respectively in Australia and the United States .
Accordingly , -LRB- subject to there being any choice of law clause -RRB- , in light of the observations I have quoted from Macmillan , it seems to me that the issue of the beneficial ownership of those shares is to be determined by Australian law : they are registered shares in a company registered in Australia and the share register is , I presume , in Australia .
Further , although probably irrelevant in light of Macmillan , the share certificates are physically in Australia .
Accordingly , I conclude that the US shares are negotiable in equity , and , following the majority view in Macmillan , any question concerning equitable interests in the shares is governed by English law , subject again to any choice of law clause .
At 142 line 45 to 143 line 3 , Oliver said that the observation -LRB- of Sir John Romilly MR in Pooley - v - Budd -LRB- 1851 -RRB- 14 Beav 34 -RRB- `` that a trust was created of unascertained goods '' could not `` stand today in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Re Waif .
\ r \ n I now turn to Re Goldcorp Exchange Limited -LRB- in Receivership -RRB- -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 AC 74 , a decision of the Privy Council allowing an appeal from the Court of Appeal in New Zealand .
\ r \ n After the decision in Goldcorp had been given , the House of Lords refused the defendant in Hunter leave to appeal : see at -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 WLR 614 .
\ r \ n CONCLUSIONS ON BENEFICIAL INTERESTS IN ENGLISH LAW On behalf of the liquidator , Mr Halpern , to whose argument I am much indebted , suggests that I should hold that the former clients of Harvard have no beneficial interest in the shares in English law , in light of the decision and reasoning in Wait , London Wine , and Goldcorp .
At page 61 of the current , Fifteenth , Edition of Underhill and Hayton `` Law of Trusts and Trustees '' there is strong adverse criticism of the decision and reasoning in Hunter .
In addition , as Mr Halpern points out , the reliance by Dillon LJ on the decision in Re Rose appears to overlook the fact that , in the relevant document , Mr Rose had specifically identified the shares which were intended to be the subject matter of the gift -LRB- see towards the bottom of page 500 -RRB- .
Underhill and Hay ton conclude their discussion as follows : \ r \ n `` In view of the weak reasoning in Hunter - v - Moss and of the ringing endorsement in Re London Wine Shippers Limited by the Privy Council in Re Goldcorp Exchange Limited .
\ r \ n As to Hunter being per incuriam , Mr Halpern argues that it is inconsistent with the reasoning in London Wine and Wait .
London Wine is a decision of a lower court , and in any event it was expressly considered and distinguished by the Court of Appeal in Hunter .
On the other hand , Wait was also a decision of the Court of Appeal , and was not expressly referred to , let alone distinguished , by the Court of Appeal in Hunter .
\ r \ n Equally , I do not consider that I can hold that Hunter is not binding on the basis that it has been effectively overruled by Goldcorp .
First , it appears to me that while the decision in Hunter is undoubtedly binding on me in principle , the decision in Goldcorp , being that of the Privy Council and not of the House of Lords , is not binding on me , and would not have been binding on the Court of Appeal in Hunter .
In my judgment , therefore , the ground upon which the Court of Appeal in Hunter distinguished London Wine is substantially the same ground upon which Goldcorp can be distinguished from Hunter .
Mr Halpern \ 's alternative argument was that Hunter could be properly distinguished from Wait , London Wine and Goldcorp on a ground on which the present case could be properly distinguished from Hunter , namely that Hunter was concerned with an express declaration of trust , whereas the other cases -LRB- including the present one -RRB- are not .
While it is true that this is a point mentioned by Dillon LJ when distinguishing London Wine -LRB- see at 458H -RRB- I have come to the conclusion that it is not a proper ground for distinguishing Hunter from Wait , London Wine and , indeed , Goldcorp and the present case .
Thirdly , in my view the suggested distinction between Hunter , on the one hand , and Wait and London Wine -LRB- and indeed Goldcorp -RRB- on the other hand is not logically defensible , a view clearly consistent with the general thrust of the observations to which I have referred in Underhill and Hay ton , and in Meagher Gummow & Lehane , referred to below .
-LRB- Indeed in the present case , I have already quoted from correspondence from Harvard to its clients in which Harvard described the holding of Australian and US shares , sold to the relevant client , as being held `` on your behalf '' and `` being your shares '' -RRB- .
First , that is a ground which is consistent with Dillon LJ \ 's reliance on Re Rose -LRB- a case concerned with shares -RRB- and his ground for distinguishing London Wine -LRB- and , by implication , Wait -RRB- which , it will be remembered , he described as being `` concerned with the appropriation of chattels and when property in chattels passes '' .
Secondly , it is on this basis that the editors of Underhill and Hayton believe that Hunter is explained -LRB- although they regard it on an unsatisfactory basis -RRB- .
The description of the sub-contracted grain in Wait , the client \ 's wine in London Wine , and the customer \ 's bullion in Goldcorp as `` an unascertained part of a mass of goods '' is quite apt .
\ r \ n In all the circumstances , therefore , it seems to me that the correct way for me , at first instance , to explain the difference between the result in Hunter , and that in Wait , London Wine and Goldcorp , is on the ground that Hunter was concerned with shares , as opposed to chattels .
Had the correspondence and internal records of Harvard gone one stage further , and identified the share numbers the subject of this arrangement , Mr Halpern accepts -LRB- quite rightly in my judgment -RRB- that the beneficial interest in the relevant shares would have been vested in the client .
\ r \ n BENEFICIAL INTERESTS : AUSTRALIAN LAW I have the benefit of a detailed report from Australian lawyers , Mallesons Stephen Jaques -LRB- `` Mallesons '' -RRB- which concludes that , on the facts I have recited , Harvard \ 's former clients would not , under Australian law , have an equitable interest in any of the Australian shares held by Harvard .
In those circumstances , Mallesons conclude that : \ r \ n `` In our view it is likely that courts of -LSB- Australia -RSB- would hold that Harvard \ 's former clients hold only contractual rig -RSB- is against Harvard and hold no equitable interest in the relevant securities held by -LSB- ANZ -RSB- .
\ r \ n CONCLUSIONS ON BENEFICIAL INTERESTS The US shares In light of the decision and reasoning of the Court of Appeal in Hunter , I conclude that Harvard \ 's former clients acquired the beneficial interest in the US shares which were sold to them , and held on their behalf by Harvard , and that those equitable interests are binding on the liquidators .
However , in relation to the US shares , and those Australian shares in which the former clients of Harvard have the beneficial interest , the position is a little more complicated .
However , as recent correspondence which I have seen demonstrates , and as indeed is borne out by Harvard \ 's reasons for holding the Australian shares in the name of ANZ and the US shares in the name of the Association , this would be a potentially expensive exercise .
\ r \ n In these circumstances , it seems to me that the sensible course to take is that suggested by Mr Halpern , namely to direct that the liquidator can sell the US shares and those Australian shares in which former clients of Harvard have a beneficial interest , and that he should then account to each former client out of the proceeds of sale of the relevant block of shares pro rata to that former client \ 's holding .
The main issue is whether former clients of Harvard have the beneficial interest in certain US shares and certain Australian shares sold to them , and held for them , by Harvard ; 2 .
Under English law , in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Hunter , by which I am bound , the US shares and the Australian shares sold to former clients after 14th July 1986 , are held beneficially for Harvard \ 's former clients ; 5 .
As my previous judgment records , the second defendant -LRB- `` Royal Hotel '' -RRB- owns the Royal Hotel , a landmark on the water-front at St. Peter Port in Guernsey .
In the previous action , I considered claims by ICCI and Royal Insurance and counterclaims by Royal Hotel arising out of the fires and the conduct of the potential claims to which they gave rise .
The basis was that , following the fires , Mr McHugh on behalf of Royal Hotel had on a number of occasions used fraudulent means or devices to promote Royal Hotel \ 's position and to obtain benefits under the business interruption policy , and that condition 5 of that policy provided for forfeiture of all such benefit in such circumstances .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Mr McHugh \ 's purpose and intention in giving the instruction was to manipulate Royal Hotel \ 's monthly and annual occupancy figures , trading turnover and profits for its 1991/1992 financial year so as to create a more favourable picture of its trading performance if and when it became either necessary or desirable to show management or audited annual accounts to one or other of Royal Hotel \ 's bankers , Republic National Bank of New York -LRB- Guernsey -RRB- -LRB- `` RNB '' -RRB- and TSB Bank -LRB- Channel Islands -RRB- -LRB- `` TSB '' -RRB- Limited .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- In compliance with Mr McHugh \ 's instructions , and as Mr McHugh knew and intended , in or about September 1991 Mr Anquetil produced three invoices in the name of Royal Hotel made out to Consolidator apparently showing accommodation at the hotel let to Consolidator for the months of July , August and September 1991 , although , as Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil each knew , no such accommodation as was shown in the invoices had been let to Consolidator .
As my previous judgment recounts , a similar course of events repeated itself when Mr McHugh instructed Mr Anquetil in or about March/April 1992 to address further invoices to BCS -LRB- another company controlled by Mr Slater whose family trust owns Consolidator -RRB- and when such invoices were in June 1992 created for the months March , April and May 1992 .
Following my judgment on 5th July 1996 , Herbert Smith by letter dated 12th August 1996 wrote announcing that ICCI and Royal Hotel had decided to avoid the material damage policy and enclosing draft points of claim identifying as the grounds non-disclosure of the matters summarized in paragraphs -LRB- 1 -RRB- to -LRB- 5 -RRB- above .
-LRB- A -RRB- MATERIALITY It is clear that the knowledge and intentions of Mr McHugh as a director and company secretary of Royal Hotel regarding the matters summarized in -LRB- 1 -RRB- to -LRB- 5 -RRB- are attributable to the Royal Hotel , and that ICCI and Royal Insurance were unaware of the matters when the material damage insurance was renewed in October 1991 .
They adduced evidence from Mr Jack Smith , a former underwriter and later manager with the Commercial Union , who was cross-examined by Miss Bucknall .
-LRB- per Lord Mustill at p.538C-D -RRB- In St. Paul at p. 124 the Court of Appeal also interpreted this definition as no different from , and to that extent as expressly approving , part of Steyn LJ \ 's formulation in the Court of Appeal in Pan Atlantic at -LSB- 1993 -RSB- 1 Ll.R .
The question is therefore whether ICCI and Royal Insurance have proved that Royal Hotel \ 's conduct through Mr McHugh was material to be known to a prudent underwriter when agreeing to renew the present material damage insurance .
Ms Bucknall cross-examined Mr Smith and Mr Walpole of ICCI by reference to the combined insurance proposal form disclosed by ICG , which could embrace hotel insurance and was itself based on a Royal Insurance form , as well as by reference to various standard forms of proposal which she put to him as being used by the Royal Insurance and other leading companies .
The following statement of the position was thus approved as correct by the Court of Appeal in St. Paul : `` The existence of such a presumption is recognized in the authorities : see Halsbury \ 's Laws of England vol .
In the present case the relevant hierarchy within ICCI consisted in 1991 of Mr Bray as commercial underwriting assistant , working in a team headed by the commercial controller Mrs Butler , above whom in seniority was Mr Peter Morris , the business manager , and then Mr Peter Walpole , the managing director .
Mr Bray also acted as part-time executive assistant to Mr Walpole .
Mr Morris has since May 1992 been managing director of Rossboroughs , brokers who acted for Royal Hotel in the placing of the present insurances and the presentation of claims under them .
His statement records that he met and discussed the matter with both Mr McHugh and Mr Walpole and Mr Bray in or after October 1996 .
No evidence was adduced that Mr Morris or Mr Butler would not in fact have been willing to attend court or to give oral evidence by video-link .
Since Mr Bray only had authority up to only \ xc2 \ xa32 million he would anyway have reported on the renewal to Mrs Butler or to Mr Morris direct .
Mr Morris \ 's underwriting authority was strictly limited to \ xc2 \ xa35 million , but in practice Mr Walpole allowed him flexibility and leeway .
Mr Bray had in April 1991 successfully taken the final set of Chartered Insurance Institute examinations for Associateship and was able to produce before me his copy of the CII textbook `` Property Insurance Risk Assessment and Control '' .
Although she did not attend for cross-examination , I also accept Mrs Butler \ 's written statement that she would have referred the matter on to Mr Morris , or to Mr Walpole in his absence .
In his statement Mr Morris says that knowledge that inter-company transactions such as those represented by the Consolidator invoices existed and were fraudulent `` would have had a considerable impact on my attitude towards underwriting the policy '' , that it `` would have raised the question of moral hazard and , as a matter of policy , it would have caused me to discuss the matter with Mr Peter Walpole with a view to agreeing an appropriate course of action '' .
But I do not consider that Mr Walpole or Mr Morris would at the time have drawn any distinction between an unfulfilled but continuing intention to use dishonestly created accounting figures as and when necessary or desirable in relation to bankers and a situation where they had actually been so used .
Thirdly , Mr Walpole gave oral evidence that the population of the Channel Islands is essentially very genuine , sincere and honest .
This evidence contrasts somewhat with his witness statement , where he said that any inference that Royal Hotel was doing so badly that Mr McHugh had caused false documents to be created to misrepresent the truth would have been a considerable concern to him `` particularly in a recession -LRB- October 1991 -RRB- , when there was already growing concern about arson '' .
This meant that it used its local presence and appreciation of local conditions , particularly in areas such as weather , to offer lower premiums than United Kingdom companies which tended to treat the Channel Islands as another English county .
Fifthly , in December 1992 , during the course of events following the fires , insurers became aware of adverse comments in a DTI report affecting Mr Slater , the individual ultimately behind Royal Hotel and its group , but took no steps to avoid any of the insurances on that ground .
Apparently , the report recorded the inspectors \ ' view that the conduct of Mr Slater and another in and about the prosecution of their bid for Norwest Hoist `` was deplorable and showed scant respect for the responsibilities of directors of public companies and the interests of shareholders '' and the inspectors recommended prosecution of Mr Slater under the Companies Act 1967 ss .
The submission can not be accepted , even if attention is confined to dishonest conduct which , under the Code of Conduct of the Bar of England and Wales , requires a pleader to have `` before him reasonably credible material which as it stands establishes a prima facie case '' .
I heard evidence from Mr Martin Bakes of Herbert Smith , Mr Carter of Royal Insurance and Mr Walpole of ICO .
I held that up to and including this date insurers did not have full knowledge of the relevant circumstances ; that had been withheld from them by Royal Hotel ; the only representations that insurers could be treated as having made up to that stage were that they did not have full information or a full understanding of the position , that they were anxious to achieve this , that they had wanted to cross-examine Mrs Farnon and Mr McHugh in the arbitration for that reason and that , once it became clear that those witnesses were not to be called , insurers were very likely to assert that there had been fraud to obtain benefit , in the absence of any satisfactory last minute explanation .
Herbert Smith \ 's letters dated 12th and 19th October 1993 gave Royal Hotel a last chance to put forward such an explanation .
In mid-1993 Royal Hotel announced that its directors had concluded that its 1993 accounts should include a prior year adjustment reversing the transactions with BCS , which Royal Hotel \ 's expert accountant in the business interruption arbitration -LRB- Mr Haberman -RRB- told insurers \ ' expert -LRB- Mr Lee -RRB- on 6th October 1993 that he suspected had been included in Royal Hotel \ 's accounts to `` massage '' the figures , though neither he nor Mrs Farnon knew why .
Mr Haberman \ 's report dated 5th October 1993 said that he had `` ascertained '' by discussion with Mrs Farnon and Mr McHugh that the rooms charged to Consolidator were occupied by related company employees and `` represent actual occupancy '' , but determined to leave them out of consideration on the basis that `` they do not represent a source of repeat or recommended business as would conventional occupants '' .
It said that prima facie the BCS invoices appeared to be dishonest documents , that Price Waterhouse -LRB- in the person of Mr Lee -RRB- had been unable to think of any other explanation for them and that , although Royal Hotel had sought to distinguish the Consolidator invoices , `` they are very similar , and your clients have declined to provide any details to support their suggestion that Consolidator received significant consideration for the charges made to it '' .
Royal Hotel \ 's points of defence and counterclaim served 24th March 1994 pleaded -LRB- in what was then paragraph 18.17 -RRB- that Mr McHugh had in mid-June 1991 instructed Mr Anquetil to raise invoices to Consolidator in the sum of \ xc2 \ xa3150 ,000 at the rate of \ xc2 \ xa350 ,000 per month for the following three months , that during January to August 1991 the hotel had provided accommodation for contractors \ ' staff working on Havilland Hall and the hotel on behalf of Royal Hotel and other group companies and that `` The sum of \ xc2 \ xa3150 ,000 was a reasonable sum for this accommodation '' .
After letters from them and Sir Patrick , Herbert Smith responded on 12th October 1994 : '' Material Damage Award We are content that this should be dealt with in the manner proposed .
Sir Patrick thought it ambiguous whether they were concurring simply in a second interim award or also in its being in Royal Hotel \ 's favour , but Herbert Smith did not respond to his request of 18th October 1994 seeking this clarification .
Mr McHugh \ 's statement confirmed that the contractors \ ' workmen had been housed in staff accommodation -LRB- Ypres Guest House , Kingslynn and Fermoy -RRB- and other guest houses , and not therefore in the rooms shown in the Consolidator invoices .
A letter from Herbert Smith to Royal Insurance of the same date recorded that the thinking behind this was , first , that insurers had good prospects of a better discount on taxation , secondly , that agreement on costs might simply provide Royal Hotel with a fighting fund for the impending trial of the `` fraud '' -LRB- i.e .
entered into , as Mr McHugh and , by him , Royal Hotel knew at the time of the transactions , to mislead Royal Hotel \ 's bankers as to the state of its balance sheer and/or -LRB- b -RRB- they included figures relating to the BCS and Consolidator transactions , which in whole or in part did not represent any or any real occupancy of the hotel and/or did not represent occupancy of the hotel in the ordinary course of its business as a hotel .
At the end of January 1996 Royal Hotel served supplementary statements from Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil in the 1994 action .
In the light of my judgment , insurers and Herbert Smith took independent expert advice on materiality , discussed materiality , inducement and the prospects of Royal Hotel establishing affirmation , decided to avoid the material damage insurance and on 12th August 1996 wrote accordingly .
On the evidence , Herbert Smith have for several decades been regularly engaged by Royal Insurance to handle most of their large and high profile claims , as well as policy interpretation and litigious matters .
The relationship is one of closeness and considerable confidence , in which Royal Hotel looked to Herbert Smith when they wanted the highest quality of legal assistance .
Royal Insurance , which instructed Herbert Smith on behalf of both itself and ICCI , thus relied upon Herbert Smith to look after the interests of insurers during the arbitrations and the preparation for the 1994 trial and , as Mr Carter confirmed , to make judgments that required to be made during their course .
No suggestion has been made that any knowledge which may have been possessed or decision which may have been taken by Herbert Smith was not or should not be attributed for any relevant purposes to both ICCI and Royal Insurance .
Mr Bakes \ 's statement , which was adduced as his evidence in chief , described how a question-mark arose over the `` honesty '' of the BCS transactions as a result of their reversal in Royal Hotel \ 's accounts in late June 1993 , Mr Lee \ 's advice that he could not think of an honest explanation and a comment by counsel for Royal Hotel in the arbitration that they had taken place `` in order to boost the revenue of the Royal Hotel '' .
The gist of Mr Bakes \ ' account in paragraphs 47-48 was that Herbert Smith were troubled that the factual position remained unclear ; a distinction was still drawn between the BCS invoices and supported by KPMG ; they had formed the view that they were dealing with untrustworthy people at Royal Hotel , but they recognized a danger that they might be allowing essentially personal and instinctive reactions to get in the way of providing objective and dispassionate advice ; all the relevant evidence was in Royal Hotel \ 's hands and they knew that the burden of proving fraud was a heavy one .
Any communication with Royal Insurance on such a point would in practice have been by Mr Higgins .
He had a very vague recollection of Mr Higgins telling him at some point that he had mentioned the point to Mr Carter , but could give no time or detail .
The phrase `` from that time as you know '' was explained by Mr Bakes as referring to his discussion with Mr Carter in early 1996 about Herbert Smith \ 's thinking in November 1994 .
He recalled the discussion with Mr Higgins and Ms Kydd in November 1994 , and said that they had been concerned about the reliability of the information produced by Royal Hotel and had concluded -LRB- a -RRB- that they would only have all the relevant facts after judgment in the 1994 action and -LRB- b -RRB- that the right course would be to wait until then before deciding whether or not to assert non-disclosure in respect of the material damage policy , The affidavit continued : `` We decided that we were not in a position to amend the pleadings in the 1994 action , in relation to the business interruption policy .
This was certainly Mr Carter \ 's attitude when , a year later , the possibility of avoidance of the material damage policy was first discussed with him by Mr Higgins .
I find not only that Herbert Smith believed and on strong grounds that there had been such dishonesty , but that they did for present purposes `` know '' the real position , however much Royal Hotel continued to brazen it out with implausible denials or evasions .
Mr Bakes was referred in re-examination to KPMG \ 's apparent continuing support of the Consolidator invoices and to Mrs Farnon \ 's statement dated 18th May 1995 basing this on representations from Mr McHugh , recorded , as Mr Bakes understood , in and on Consolidator \ 's letter dated 11th February 1993 .
This contrasts not only with a submission by Lord Irvine during the proceedings for summary judgment that paragraph 19 of Mr McHugh \ 's statement was a `` giveaway '' which caused Herbert Smith to put two and two together and led to the November 1995 pleading , but also with Mr Bakes \ 's subsequent statement in his witness statement that paragraph 19 `` reinforced my feeling that any deception might well have been intended to affect Royal Hotel \ 's bankers '' .
In reality , I consider , once the particulars had been reviewed in November 1994 , Herbert Smith was aware and for present purposes knew that the only purpose of the elaborate and palpably false invoices to Consolidator must have been to mislead and , in particular , to mislead persons such as bankers reviewing the hotel \ 's trading and that Mr McHugh on behalf of Royal Hotel must have caused them to be brought them into existence for that dishonest purpose .
Further , Herbert Smith \ 's letter dated 12th October 1994 involved a recognition of the validity of Sir Patrick Neill \ 's first award under the material damage policy , of his continuing jurisdiction and so by necessary implication of the continuing validity of the material damage award , since his jurisdiction was predicated on liability being admitted -LRB- as insurers themselves had successfully persuaded him in February 1994 , with the result that no actual business interruption award was ever issued -RRB- .
It seems unlikely -LRB- although Mr Bakes was not asked by either side about this -RRB- that it was simply coincidence that after the November 1994 particulars Herbert Smith failed to respond to Sir Patrick \ 's requests for clarification of their position on a second interim award on costs .
Although Royal Hotel continued to brazen it out , it seems to me that a reasonable person would have reached exactly the same conclusion that Herbert Smith reached , namely that these were dishonest and fictitious invoices deliberately created by Mr McHugh to distort the hotel \ 's trading in the eyes of persons such as bankers .
The primary basis for Miss Bucknall \ 's submission is the statement of principle by Wigram V-C in Henderson v. Henderson -LRB- 1843 -RRB- 3 Hare 100 , 114 : '' ... where a given matter becomes the subject of litigation in , and of adjudication by , a court of competent jurisdiction , the court requires the parties to that litigation to bring forward their whole case , and will not -LRB- except under special circumstances -RRB- permit the same parties to open the same subject of litigation in respect of matter which might have been brought forward as part of the subject in contest , but which was not brought forward , only because they have , from negligence , inadvertence , or even accident , omitted part of their case .
v. A-G for Queensland -LSB- 1979 -RSB- AC 411 , 425G , this was again identified as the true basis for the wider jurisdiction , which the Privy Council there said `` ought only to be applied where the facts are such as to constitute an abuse : otherwise there is a danger of a party being shut out from bringing forward a genuine subject of litigation '' .
Valuable discussions of the nature and scope of the jurisdiction under both heads are found in other authorities cited in Chitty , such as Dallal v. Bank Mellat -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 1 Q.B .
It was argued in the 1991 action that JMB was precluded under the wider principle in Henderson v. Henderson from pursuing the claims made in the 1991 action , since they could with reasonable diligence have been made in the 1985-86 proceedings .
He went on that the fact that there were no causes of action at all until 25th February 1986 made the matter even clearer , since : `` It would in my judgment be an unwarranted extension of the doctrine of Henderson v. Henderson , even if it were otherwise applicable , to apply it to a case where no cause of action existed at the relevant date but which might then have existed had JMB made the necessary demands on the plaintiffs .
That being so , the Privy Council applied Henderson v. Henderson in its wider aspect .
Although I have in mind the underlying basis of the wider principle in Henderson v. Henderson and the words of the Privy Council in Brisbane C.C .
Tai Ping obtained facultative reinsurance of their line from among others GAN and Eagle Star .
Of these the third , GAN , and the sixth , Eagle Star , are also reinsurers of the leaders Tai Ping -LRB- and plaintiffs in the first action -RRB- .
Mr G R Purdon of GAB Robins , Taiwan , International Loss Adjusters , was instructed on behalf of the direct insurers .
Mr D A Robbins of Dr JH Burgoyne and Partners Limited , Singapore , consulting scientists and engineers , was instructed by GAB Robins to investigate the fire aspects on behalf of the direct insurers .
The above is a standard London Market Claims Co-Operation Clause reference SCOR -LRB- UK -RRB- Clause 012 4/83 .
Whatever the governing law of the reinsurance contract as a whole , the Taiwan Insurance Law as interpreted in Taiwan governs questions of avoidance of the reinsurance contract for misrepresentation .
They may affect the way in which a provision incorporated from the original insurance into the reinsurance falls to be construed so as to give rise to `` back-to-back '' coverage , but they do not affect or purport expressly or implicitly to affect the law by which the contract is governed : Pine Top v Unione Italiana -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 476 , Vesta v Butcher -LSB- 1989 -RSB- AC 852 , Arig Insurance v SASA Assicurazione -LRB- unreported -RRB- 10.2.98 , Tuckey J .
The central administration of the plaintiffs in the first action and of four of the plaintiffs in the second action is in England -LRB- there is an issue as to whether General Accident \ 's central administration is in England or Scotland -RRB- .
\ t The words `` as original '' in the Tai Ping Slip and the words `` The Reinsurance is subject in all respects to the same clauses and conditions as original '' in the Central Slip were intended to ensure that the risk undertaken by reinsurers was identical as to period , geographical limits and nature of the risk , with the risk undertaken by Tai Ping/Central as direct insurers : see Pine Top v Unione Italiana -LRB- supra -RRB- Gatehouse J ; Vesta v Butcher -LRB- supra -RRB- p 875A , Neill LJ ; and Arig Insurance v SASA Assicuriazione -LRB- supra -RRB- , Tuckey J .
Also in this connection there should be noted a passage in the speech of Lord Griffiths in Vesta v Butcher at page 896C-E .
Negative Declarations \ t Mr Lockey for Tai Ping submitted as follows : \ t `` Claims for declarations , and in particular negative declarations , must be viewed with great caution in all situations involving possible conflicts of jurisdictions , since they obviously lend themselves to improper attempts at forum shopping '' : The Volvox Hollandia -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 361 , at 371 , Kerr LJ ; First National Bank of Boston v Union Bank of Switzerland -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 32 at 38 , Sir Michael Kerr .
Akai v People \ 's Insurance Co -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 90 , 106 col 2 .
\ t \ tWhere leave to serve out of the jurisdiction a writ claiming a negative declaration is challenged , the Court will have to consider both the question whether there is justification for seeking that relief and the separate question of whether England is the appropriate forum in which to seek it .
-LRB- b -RRB- Generally \ t As issues relating to avoidance and the claims co-operation clauses fall to be determined according to English law , there is a strong case for saying that England is the natural and appropriate forum in which to resolve these issues : see New Hampshire v Phillips Electronics -LRB- supra -RRB- at 14G , where Phillips LJ said : \ t \ t `` As the issues of construction fall to be determined according to English law , I consider that England was the natural and appropriate forum in which to seek to resolve those issues .
\ t As to issue -LRB- 1 -RRB- in the second action , the alleged representation is contained in a fax dated 13 February 1996 from Alexander & Alexander -LRB- Taiwan -RRB- Ltd to Mr Gell , AHG -- London which stated : \ t \ t `` The following are the answers to your questions ... \ t \ tD -RRB- \ tThis project has installed a very good Fire Protection system which includes below six fire protections in every floor .
Mr Steven Lowe , a partner in Stephenson Harwood , solicitors for Tai Ping , states at paragraph 13 of his affidavit : \ t \ t '' ... : I am informed by Mr Su Ming-Teh of the Taipei Fire Fighting Equipment Association -LRB- an expert in fire fighting engineering -RRB- that foam water and fog water systems are only used in wafer plants in a very limited capacity , the main fire fighting systems employed in water plants being sprinklers , hydrants and hand held extinguishers , and that the drawings do show that there was a foam water and a fog water system , but not on floor 4 of FAB III where the fire occurred .
The General Notes refer to NFPA 13 standards which envisage sprinklers in the voids , but these apply in the United States and have no statutory or regulatory effect in Taiwan , and the detailed drawings , which show no sprinkler system in the ceiling voids , would obviously prevail in the event of any inconsistency between the detailed drawings and the General Notes ... '' See further the report by Burgoynes .
To the extent that factual evidence is required on this subject , Mr Robbins of Burgoynes is likely to be the most important witness and he is in Singapore .
\ t As to issue -LRB- 3 -RRB- , evidence will be required from six London underwriters and one underwriter from Stockholm and probably expert witnesses from the London market .
This may be sensitive to some factual evidence from Taiwan -LRB- and evidence as to the law of Taiwan -RRB- .
To the extent that factual evidence is required , I have already referred to Mr Robbins of Burgoynes and to Mr Purdon of GAB Robins .
As a result of the splitting up of that Union disputes have occurred and an agreement was entered into by a number of former soviet shipping companies to deal with the question of their containers , and it is in issue as to whether Azov is a party to that agreement .
\ r \ n The parties have agreed that if there is jurisdiction to arbitrate , in effect , that is to say if Azov is a party to the agreement , then Mr Donald Davies should be their sole arbitrator .
That , however , was under full reservations by Azov as to its not being a party to the agreement and thus there not being jurisdiction in Mr Davies to act as an arbitrator .
Mr Davies rendered his award on 30th January and it was in favour of Baltic , that is to say he found that Azov was a party to the agreement and that he therefore did have jurisdiction .
On behalf of Baltic , Mr Christopher Smith submits that it would be neither just , expeditious nor economical to permit such a complete rehearing .
So that matter is neutral , save , I suppose , that inasmuch as the Report on the Bill contemplates that the running , on such an application , is primarily that of the party who wishes to arbitrate rather than that of the party who wishes to challenge the arbitration , the burden of the absence of such an application rests upon Baltic rather than upon Azov .
In a nutshell , Dubal alleged that its former chief executive , Mr Ian Livingstone , conspired with Mr Hany Salaam , the first defendant , with the assistance of the latter \ 's solicitor Mr Anthony Amhurst , the second defendant , to steal this sum under the guise of sham contracts for the purported provision of commercial services .
Dubal \ 's business , as its full name implies , is the operation of an aluminium smelter in Dubai .
\ tMr Livingstone was not a defendant to these proceedings because an earlier action brought by Dubal in this court in 1995 against him -LRB- and his wife and companies -RRB- in respect of not only the scheme presently complained of but also other matters arising out of the period of his office with Dubal ended in an agreement dated 31 January 1996 under which he paid to Dubal , while denying liability , some $ 15,540,000 in full and final settlement of all Dubal \ 's claims .
Dubal alleged that $ 6,327,918.09 of that settlement was to be referred to the scheme , being the alleged total of all sums received by Mr Livingstone pursuant to it .
\ tThat balance fell again when in the course of trial Mr Amhurst and his partners in the partnerships of Amhurst Brown Martin & Nicholson -LRB- `` ABMN '' , the third defendants -RRB- and Amhurst Brown Colombotti -LRB- `` ABC '' , the fourth defendants -RRB- settled with Dubal , on terms providing for the payment of $ 10,000,000 to Dubal by ABMN and ABC and the withdrawal of all allegations against Mr Amhurst and the partnerships by Dubal .
\ tMr Livingstone , although not a defendant because of his settlement with Dubal , is a party to these proceedings as first third party .
First , he disputes and rejects Mr Salaam \ 's and Mr Livingstone \ 's explanation for the scheme , and their principal defence as to the honesty of it , that it was legitimately authorised by him as the right hand man and confidant of the Ruler of Dubai and ultimate owner of Dubal .
Secondly , his explanation for the receipt of such funds as he received is that he agreed with Mr Marc Rich , at that time -LRB- in or about May 1987 -RRB- the principal shareholder and director of Richco , a personal commission for himself , payable by Richco out of its own funds , for bringing about a commercial alliance between Dubal and Richco .
Dubal agreed that he had no legitimate position or power to authorise the scheme ; but otherwise it did not ultimately take issue with Mr Salaam \ 's -LRB- and Mr Livingstone \ 's -RRB- evidence that Mr Al Tajir was a party to it .
Mr Al Tajir , on the other hand , said that not only did he have no position or power to authorise such a scheme on behalf of Dubal and the Ruler of Dubai , but also that he did not seek to do so at all , whether with or without legitimate authority : he did not participate in the scheme at all , but merely negotiated with Richco a legitimate business commission for himself .
Dubal , having paid out between 4 September 1987 and 11 February 1993 a total of $ 50,117,622 and recovered $ 15,540,000 from Mr Livingstone -LRB- out of which it gave credit in these proceedings for only $ 6,327,918 -RRB- in 1996 and a further $ 10,000,000 from the Amhurst defendants -LRB- out of which it gave credit for $ 9,250,000 and referred the balance of $ 750,000 to costs -RRB- during the course of trial , made the following financial claims against the Salaam defendants : \ t -LRB- 1 -RRB- against Mr Salaam himself : \ t \ t - in knowing assistance : $ 50,117,622 plus interest and costs -LRB- less a credit of $ 15,577,918 -RRB- ; \ t \ t - in knowing receipt : $ 27,848,149.61 etc .
The essence of its case was that Mr Livingstone breached his fiduciary duty as a director and chief executive of Dubal in promoting and participating in the scheme , that Mr Salaam -LRB- and Mr Al Tajir -RRB- were also involved in promoting and participating in the scheme , and in sharing in its rewards .
\ tMr Salaam , on the other hand , said that the scheme was honest in its conception and execution ; that it was intended to benefit Dubal by bringing to it a commercial alliance with the largest and strongest metal trader in the world , Richco , and that that alliance has continued to this day ; that it was promoted to Mr Salaam by Mr Al Tajir himself , with all the prestige and authority that he exercised formally as Director of the Office of the Ruler of Dubai \ 's Affairs or less formally but equally effectively as the real and acknowledged protector in Dubai of Dubal \ 's interests ; that the income earned by him and his companies from the scheme was essentially a reward for securing for Dubal its alliance with Richco , and that custom and practice in Dubai in such matters exonerated him from any accusation of dishonesty ; that Mr Al Tajir \ 's participation in the scheme was likewise a guarantee of its legitimacy , as Mr Amhurst \ 's involvement as a well-known City of London solicitor in the drafting and execution of the documents and in the implementation of the scheme was itself proof of its bona fides .
He did not personally contribute to the payment of $ 10,000,000 to Dubal , all of which was met by his partners in ABMN and ABC .
He regarded Mr Al Tajir as clothed with the authority of the Ruler of Dubai and liaised with him generally regarding Dubal \ 's affairs as the Ruler \ 's representative .
It was he , Mr Livingstone , who identified the need for a commercial alliance between Dubal and Richco .
In his witness statement , which became his evidence in chief before me , he said this : `` What happened in Dubal from 1992 onwards -LSB- when the Richco consultancy agreement came under question , a process which culminated in Mr Livingstone leaving Dubai in October 1992 and in Dubal giving notice to Richco of the termination of the agreement on 22 March 1993 -RSB- was the phenomenon well-known in autocratic feudal regimes ; namely a `` changing of the guard '' .
\ tMr Al Tajir \ 's evidence , however , was that he had ceased to be Director of the Ruler \ 's Affairs in 1981 , and thereafter had no formal role in the government of Dubai or in the administration of Dubal .
The approach regarding an alliance with Richco had come from Mr Livingstone , who asked him to contact Marc Rich personally .
Mr Al Tajir asked Mr Livingstone to clear the matter with Sheikh Hamdan , one of the Ruler \ 's sons and chairman of Dubal .
He was assured by Mr Livingstone and Mr Amhurst that the commercial alliance had to be structured in this way in order to be acceptable to Dubal .
It was his understanding , in reliance on Mr Livingstone \ 's executive authority , Mr Al Tajir \ 's political standing and the involvement of a reputable London solicitor , Mr Amhurst -LRB- whom he regarded as acting for Dubal rather than Mr Salaam -RRB- , that the scheme had the approval of Dubal and the government of Dubai .
\ tIn my `` Unreasoned Findings '' I found as follows : Mr Ian Livingstone -LRB- the First Third Party -RRB- was in breach of his fiduciary duties as Chief Executive of Dubai Aluminium Company -LRB- `` Dubal '' -RRB- in connection with the promotion and organisation and operation of a scheme , involving the making and operation of the Richco Consultancy Agreement and the Subsidiary Agreements -LRB- collectively the `` Agreements '' -RRB- , for the payment of monies to be derived from Dubal , routed through Marc Rich & Co AG -LRB- `` Richco '' , the Second Third Party , now known as Glencore International AG -RRB- and paid to participants in the scheme -LRB- the `` scheme '' -RRB- ; and in so doing dishonestly received US$ 6,327,918.09 as one of the participants .
\ r \ n Mr Tajir did not have authority , whether actual or ostensible , from the Ruler of Dubai at the relevant time , HH Sheikh Rashid , nor from the Government of Dubai nor from the ultimate owners of Dubal , to authorise the scheme or the Agreements or the payments made under them , and there was no honest belief by any of the participants in such authority .
\ r \ n In ordinary circumstances Richco would have been entitled to charge Dubal a fee in return for services rendered under the RCA , and one fifth of 2.5 % , ie 0.5 % , of the value of all sales of Dubal \ 's products would have been a reasonable and legitimate fee .
\ r \ n In March 1995 Dubal commenced proceedings against Mr Livingstone in respect of claims arising out of the scheme as well as other claims .
Dubal gives credit to Mr Salaam in respect of that settlement in the sum of $ 6,327,918.09 , thus reducing their claim in knowing assistance against Mr Salaam from the gross sum of $ 50,117,622 to $ 43,789,703.91 ; but Dubal has failed to prove that the admitted recovery arising out of the Livingstone settlement is to be limited to the sum of $ 6,327,918.09 .
Only ABMN and ABC had contributed to the payment of monies under the settlement agreement with Dubal , and therefore only ABMN and ABC were in the position of claiming a contribution from others .
ABMN and ABC -LRB- other than Mr Amhurst -RRB- sought contribution from the Salaam defendants , Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir -LRB- but not from Richco -RRB- .
The effect of this settlement , therefore , was that , for instance in the case of Mr Salaam , Dubal \ 's claim had at that time fallen to : $ 50,117,622 plus interest and costs less $ 6,327,918.09 -LRB- the Livingstone settlement -RRB- , $ 9,250,000 -LRB- the Amhurst settlement -RRB- and then $ 18,000,000 -LRB- the Al Tajir settlement -RRB- .
JMS was to receive -LRB- a -RRB- half of the 2.5 % fee on sales provided for in the Richco consultancy agreement , and in addition -LRB- b -RRB- a fee of $ 5 per tonne of alumina supplied by Clarendon under the ASA plus a fee of $ 2 per tonne of alumina traded between Dubal and Richco and/or Clarendon in addition to the annual tonnage supplied pursuant to the ASA -LRB- the `` $ 5s and $ 2s '' -RRB- .
For each year Clarendon agreed to sell , and Dubal agreed to buy a base quantity of 260,000 tonnes of alumina , with options to increase or decrease .
Although the ASA contained full terms for the physical delivery of alumina , the contract contemplated that in at any rate 1988 and 1989 Dubal would be primarily supplied by its pre-existing supplier , Alcoa , and the ASA would for those years operate only as a contract for differences , in the sense that if the price payable by Dubal to Alcoa were lower than the ASA formula price , then Dubal would pay the difference to Clarendon , and vice versa .
In effect , therefore , the ASA guaranteed to Dubal a source of supply for 10 years at a price , related to the market price of aluminium in 1988 , and thereafter determined by put and call options .
\ tAs matters turned out , Dubal did well out of the ASA for two years , until the pricing formula was changed by an amendment in September 1989 .
Dubai , the Dubal smelter , and Gulf Resources Corporation \ tI now have to set the Richco consultancy agreement in its historical context .
\ tDubai is one of the Gulf emirates , part of the United Arab Emirates -LRB- UAE -RRB- .
In 1971 Dubai became one of the seven founding emirates of the UAE , a federation with a central constitution , but within each individual emirate power remained in the hands of the Ruler and his family .
-LSB- 5 -RSB- \ tSheikh Rashid died in October 1990 , and was succeeded by his eldest son , HH Sheikh Maktoum Bin Rashid Al Maktoum -LRB- `` Sheikh Maktoum '' , the present Ruler of Dubai -RRB- .
He remained , however , UAE Ambassador to the Court of St James , an Emirates post , until 1987 .
There is nevertheless no dispute that at least up to 1981 Mr Al Tajir spoke for the Ruler , and played an active role , in connection with the affairs of the project for the construction of an aluminium smelter in Dubai and ultimately of Dubal itself .
Mr Salaam , who had been involved in the development of aluminium and chemical plants in the Gulf , was himself an early exponent of the idea of an aluminium smelter for Dubai .
Sheikh Rashid started out as owner initially of 80 % of Dubal \ 's shares , but before long acquired the remaining 20 % .
\ tIn February 1978 Mr Livingstone , who was by profession a chartered accountant but had long worked in industry , commenced work as managing director of Dubal .
That company was the constructor of the smelter , and had previously built the Alba -LRB- Aluminium Bahrain -RRB- smelter in Bahrain .
Mr Livingstone had been first finance manager and then general manager at Alba since February 1971 , and had guided it through the final stages of construction into start-up and then established production .
In October 1979 Mr Livingstone succeeded Mr Brauner as deputy chairman and a director of Dubal and also became its chief executive .
By clause 1 of each Mr Livingstone was empowered - `` To transact , manage , carry on and do all and every business matter deemed requisite and necessary or in any manner connected with or having reference to the business and affairs of the company in relation to the financing of the company \ 's business , the placing of contracts and all other relevant matters of whatsoever nature pertaining to the whole of the company \ 's undertaking and business including without limiting the generality thereof its smelter and related products in Dubai and elsewhere '' and by clause 9 he was authorised - `` To execute sign enter into acknowledge perfect and do all such deals agreements instruments acts and things which will be requisite for or in relation to all or any of the purposes or matters aforesaid .
\ tIt is common ground that by reason of his appointment as chief executive , director and attorney of Dubal , there was a fiduciary relationship between Mr Livingstone and Dubal and a fiduciary duty owed by the former to protect the latter and its assets .
Mr Salaam and the GRC Management Agreement \ tOn 29 October 1979 , on the same day that Mr Livingstone entered upon his new appointments and received his powers of attorney , the board of Dubal approved and Mr Livingstone signed on behalf of Dubal a management contract with one of Mr Salaam \ 's Panamanian companies known as Gulf Resources Corporation -LRB- `` GRC '' -RRB- .
Over the last half century or so his family has provided three prime ministers of Lebanon and one of Jordan , has founded Middle East Airlines , and has played an important role in the business development of the Gulf states .
He was first introduced to him in Lebanon at a time when Mr Al Tajir was already the Director of the Ruler of Dubai \ 's Affairs .
\ tIn about 1971 Mr Salaam was touring the Gulf states with the chairman of Kaiser Aluminium , seeking to promote a `` Grand Smelter Scheme '' , for the repetition of the Alba project in other nations such as Saudi Arabia , Qatar , Abu Dhabi and Dubai .
He met Sheikh Rashid and Mr Al Tajir in Dubai in connection with these ideas .
Instead , Dubai turned to BSCL -LRB- a company within the Wimpey group -RRB- for the construction of the Dubal smelter .
Dubal \ 's thesis in this connection was that the GRC management agreement was an attempt , a very successful attempt , to fleece Dubal , orchestrated by Mr Salaam , Mr Al Tajir and Mr Livingstone : in other words a prototype of the Richco consultancy agreement scheme .
It is plain that Mr Salaam benefitted from the employment of his company as Dubal \ 's manager , and so did Mr Livingstone .
In its action against Mr Livingstone , one of the matters Dubal complained of was his illicit receipt of sums under the GRC agreement .
Mr Livingstone \ 's cross-examination by Mr Seymour on behalf of Dubal contained this passage -LRB- on day 10 at 88/91 -RRB- : \ t `` Q. \ tGRC was thus extremely well remunerated under this agreement , was it not .
By 2 February , the Government of Dubai , in the name of the Ruler but effectively in the form of a committee chaired by Sheikh Mohamed and also containing on it Mr Ahmed Al Tayer , the finance minister of the UAE and a confidant of Sheikh Hamdan , but significantly not Mr Al Tajir , had commissioned a report on Dubal from the accountants , Messrs Price Waterhouse .
\ tAs a result of this recommendation , Mr Livingstone began to report to Mr Al Tayer in Dubai and to Mr Amhurst in London in connection with the renegotiation of the GRC agreement .
However , in an affidavit which Mr Salaam made for the purpose of these proceedings -LRB- his third affirmation , at para 83 -RRB- Mr Salaam had said this : `` I recall that at one stage I was sufficiently frustrated by what was going on and the confused messages which were coming through to GRC that I intervened directly with HH Sheikh Mohamed ... What I do clearly recall is that in my audience with HH Sheikh Mohamed while there was , predictably given the political rivalries endemic to Dubai life , a certain amount of invective about HE Mahdi Tajir and the money HH Sheikh Mohamed -LRB- no doubt , correctly -RRB- believed that he was earning in connection with his stewardship of Dubal and about Mr Livingstone , HH Sheikh Mohamed was not critical of me or GRC ... '' \ tMr Salaam was asked about that passage in his affirmation -LRB- at day 8 , page 20 -RRB- : \ t `` Q. \ tWould you like to tell his Lordship about the certain amount of invective about Mr Al Tajir at your meeting with Sheikh Mohamed that you refer to in this paragraph .
Thus it was there submitted that as a result of the conversation on 11 March 1983 Mr Salaam knew that Mr Al Tajir was not in a position to give authorisation on the part of Dubal or the government of Dubai to any transactions , and in particular not in a position to authorise the payment of any `` commission '' to any one .
\ tIn my judgment , however , the critical fact behind the rise and fall of GRC was that in 1979 when the management agreement was made , Mr Al Tajir was in the ascendant , whereas after 1981 , when Sheikh Rashid suffered an incapacitating stroke , he had lost his power base in Dubai as the representative of the Ruler and the Director of his Affairs .
\ tSheikh Rashid remained the Ruler of Dubai until his death in 1990 : but from the time of his incapacitating stroke in 1981 , his effective rule was over .
Mr Briggs had served throughout his working life in various police forces in the middle east , and in 1965 became the Commandant of Police in Dubai , at Sheikh Rashid \ 's personal request .
Mr Briggs also said that Mr Al Tajir \ 's office at the Ruler \ 's court was vacated shortly afterwards and he ceased thereafter to carry out any duties or functions on behalf of the government of Dubai .
It was put to Mr Briggs on behalf of Mr Livingstone -LRB- day 2 , page 75 -RRB- that `` when Sheikh Mohamed took over responsibility for Dubai Petroleum , Mahdi Tajir stopped going to his office every day but still retained his office there , he still retained his desk there and the staff continued to work for him ?
Mr Briggs also made it clear that following Mr Al Tajir \ 's exit from an official role in government in Dubai , everyone knew of the change in his status .
As Mr Briggs said -LRB- day 10 , page 83 -RRB- in the context of Sheikh Mohamed \ 's letter : `` this sort of thing in the place like Dubai goes round .
\ tOnly Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone say that Mr Al Tajir remained in power and in office as Sheikh Rashid \ 's representative , at any rate in matters relating to Dubal , and able to authorise the Richco scheme : that is evidence which , for the reasons given above , I can not accept .
\ tThe importance of the GRC management contract is therefore this : it shows Mr Salaam , Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir associated in an earlier venture under which the proceeds of a highly profitable management contract with Dubal passed into their hands ; and it shows that that contract was brought to an end after the ill-health of Sheikh Rashid had led to the resignation of Mr Al Tajir from his previous role in government as the representative of the Ruler and the Director of the Ruler \ 's Office ; and it shows that Sheikh Mohamed , who had effectively succeeded to Mr Al Tajir \ 's position , had told Mr Salaam that Mr Al Tajir \ 's `` ways of business are over '' .
At that time Mr Al Tajir spoke to him about Dubal , apparently with the authority of the Dubai government : Mr Salaam asserted that Mr Al Tajir was still Director of the Ruler \ 's Office and of Petroleum Affairs .
He recognised that his influence and presence in government affairs had waned , but that this `` did not apply to Dubal ... where Mahdi Tajir \ 's authority on behalf of the Dubai Government was unquestioned '' .
He asked his employees at GRC , a Mr Mike Thomas and a Mr Ray Christopherson , to investigate the possibility of alternative gas supplies for Dubal .
As for a proposed United States sales agency , this was delegated to his right hand man and chief accountant in his organisation , Mr Alex Ayoub -LRB- who unfortunately died in 1991 -RRB- , as well as to his solicitor , Mr Amhurst , in liaison with Mr Livingstone .
This was negotiated with Mr Livingstone and vetted by Dubal \ 's own solicitors , Messrs Allen & Overy .
Mr Al Tajir set up a meeting with Mr Rich , to be attended by Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone .
He looked on the detail of the Richco/Dubal side of the arrangement to be a matter for Mr Livingstone to discuss with Richco , while his `` essential role '' was to persuade Mr Rich himself into an alliance and , if that succeeded , to negotiate with him the terms on which he -LRB- Mr Salaam -RRB- and Mr Al Tajir were to receive commission for introducing Dubal and Richco to one another .
He knew that I knew Dubai and Dubal well .
They reflected the fees already negotiated with Dubal in the context of the Valo sales agreement : the $ 2m was an upfront mobilisation fee , without which he was not prepared to commit GRC \ 's resources , a `` show of goodwill and seriousness '' , and the $ 85,000 monthly fee was an estimate of the likely costs of an office in Dubai -LRB- if one should be needed -RRB- .
It was only as things turned out that , once Mr Rich was comfortable with his relationship with Dubal , he , together with Mr Al Tajir and Mr Livingstone , effectively excluded Mr Salaam from further involvement .
He did not regard Mr Livingstone \ 's windfall as unusual : senior executives in the Gulf or Arab world would often be compensated in such form , in the absence of share options or the other elements of a remuneration package which might have been available in the West .
This was effected through Mr Livingstone and with the aid of Mr Amhurst : on 28 February 1988 Mr Amhurst instructed Richco on behalf of JMS -LRB- and Valo -RRB- that 15 % of the amount payable to those subsidiaries should be paid to a separate account at Banque Gutzwiller , Geneva .
In 1987 Mr Livingstone was concerned about the following aspects of Dubal \ 's business : long term financial success required a fourth potline , but Mr Al Tajir informed him that the Ruler would not be willing to fund the expansion himself ; expansion was unsafe without ensuring the availability of increased supplies of alumina at reasonable prices ; as it was , Alcoa was indicating that it no longer wished to continue as Dubal \ 's exclusive supplier ; tariff problems were causing difficulties in finding sufficient outlets for Dubal \ 's premium products .
The ASA would not have been possible on the terms agreed with Clarendon but for the consultancy agreement .
\ tWith Mr Al Tajir \ 's approval , Mr Livingstone therefore began negotiating with Mr Rich -LRB- `` I had known Marc Rich personally for many years '' -RRB- and with Mr Salaam .
The division of payment was discussed at lunch -LRB- at the Mirabelle restaurant in London -RRB- in mid 1987 .
\ tThe negotiations with Mr Rich included Mr Livingstone himself .
As , however , discussions developed for the ASA , so Mr Rich and Mr Salaam were prepared to agree a 50 % / 50 % split with additional payments becoming due to Mr Salaam \ 's companies on sales and purchases under the ASA .
It began on a Thursday , when he was cross-examined first by Mr Boswood on behalf of the Amhurst defendants and then by Mr Seymour on behalf of Dubal .
He was also involved in the arrangements made in September 1988 for a bogus option undertaken between Clarendon and Dubal under which Clarendon paid $ 3,000,000 to Nillet , and which , when unscrambled , led to the need to repay the $ 3m : Mr Livingstone said that the $ 3m had originally gone to Mr Salaam , `` who had problems with his cashflow '' , and that when the money had to be repaid , it came out of his , Mr Livingstone \ 's , own pocket .
\ tThere was another bogus option for $ 2.6 million arranged by Mr Livingstone in December 1988 : it was Dubal who this time paid that money to Richco as the price of the option , and Clarendon in due course paid that money on to an account in Zurich for the benefit of Metal Production Consultants , a company under the control of M & F Engineering , in payment of the cost of hiring aircraft in connection with Mr Al Tajir \ 's shuttle diplomacy in the Lebanese peace process .
Mr Livingstone explained -LRB- day 10 , page 38ff -RRB- : \ t `` A. \ t. ... These were substantial bills which really had nothing to do with -LSB- Dubal -RSB- and I was charged with finding a way in which to settle the matter ... \ tQ .
Later in the day , in answer to Mr Seymour , he became franker still , and all but dropped the defence that Mr Tajir \ 's authority made such arrangements proper in the `` other '' world of Dubai .
If the plant did not succeed , if it did not start and produce and sell metal , consequences would be catastrophic for Dubai , not just for the Dubal .
\ tMr Livingstone \ 's cross-examination continued on the following Monday : he was then cross-examined by Mr Nigel Davis QC on behalf of Mr Salaam and by Mr Ali Malek QC on behalf of Mr Al Tajir .
Thus he was asked why he had not sought to defend himself against the proceedings which Dubal had brought against him by seeking to implicate Mr Al Tajir , in reliance on the latter \ 's legitimate authority in Dubai to promote the scheme .
He said that Mr Al Tajir as well as he wanted Mr Salaam to be involved ; and that it was he , Mr Livingstone , who had negotiated with Mr Rich .
He said that he had become friends with Mr Livingstone and saw him from time to time as such , but that he had no further role after 1981 in the administration of Dubai .
Sometime in 1986 his response to Mr Livingstone \ 's telling him about his concerns for Dubal was that he should go to see his chairman , Sheikh Hamdan , about them .
In 1987 in a similar conversation Mr Livingstone informed him that the management of Dubal had identified Richco as the company with which to form a strategic alliance to assist Dubal in its pressing problems .
He was asked if he would assist Dubal in approaching Mr Rich , his good friend and neighbour in St Moritz , personally .
He therefore contacted Mr Rich initially by telephone and then in a meeting in St Moritz or Zug -LRB- Richco \ 's headquarters -RRB- .
Mr Rich suggested that `` his people '' meet Mr Livingstone to discuss actual figures .
At about this time , Mr Salaam told him that he had also been approached by Mr Livingstone to assist him on a deal with Mr Rich .
He had a further meeting with Mr Rich in late 1987 or early in 1988 , and frequent meetings with Mr Strothotte in connection with mutual business relating to power engineering and infrastructure projects in the middle east , but he was never told of Mr Salaam \ 's involvement in the Richco deal , nor of any payments to Mr Livingstone .
This encompassed all businesses with Richco , including business ventures other than Dubal , including commodity trading with Iran ... hundreds of millions of pounds were going through numerous companies connected with the Altajir family ... '' \ tAs for Mr Saad Salaam , Saad had requested him on one occasion to ask Mr Salaam to honour a long standing business arrangement between the brothers , whereby Saad was to receive a share of the profits of any business in the Gulf .
\ tIn late spring or early summer of 1987 -LRB- we now know that it was on 26 or 27 May -RRB- , Mr Rich and Mr Pincus Green -LRB- the latter being Richco \ 's President - there has been no evidence from him either -RRB- came into Mr Strothotte \ 's office to say that they had that day met Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam .
Dubal had proposed the passing over of 80 % of the fees , but Mr Rich thought that too high .
He , Mr Strothotte , regarded Mr Livingstone as in executive control of Dubal , and Mr Al Tajir as a man of considerable political influence , who filled a power vacuum left by the inactivity of the sick Ruler \ 's sons : the scheme therefore appeared to be approved by the government of Dubai .
Nevertheless , in accepting them he relied on the executive authority of Mr Livingstone , the political standing of Mr Al Tajir , and the involvement of an apparently reputable London solicitor , Mr Amhurst .
\ tSheikh Hamdan \ 's main concern , apart from dealing with the matter of Mr Al Tajir \ 's succession by Sheikh Mohamed as effective director of the Ruler \ 's Affairs and Petroleum Affairs in 1981 , was to oppose the evidence given by Mr Livingstone to the effect that he had taken no interest as chairman in Dubal \ 's affairs , and had left matters to his executives and to Mr Al Tajir .
He said that he was always available at his majlis -LSB- 13 -RSB- for any meeting which Mr Livingstone desired , and that he did meet Mr Livingstone regularly to discuss Dubal \ 's affairs .
In any event , I am absolutely sure that Mr Livingstone did not tell me that it was intended Dubal would enter into a consultancy agreement with a third party as a means by which substantial sums of money were to be paid by Dubal to either himself or Mr Salaam or Mr Altajir .
He has had special responsibility for locating all files relevant to the Livingstone or current proceedings brought by Dubal .
There are no documents , whether in report form , or in informal form , relating to any market research or market intelligence information provided by Richco to Dubal ; there are no documents prior to September 1987 suggesting Dubal \ 's inability to sell its products at satisfactory prices ; there are no documents prior to September 1987 suggesting or investigating a problem in relation to the supply of alumina ; there are no documents which suggest that Dubal was receiving any instructions from or having contact with Mr Al Tajir as a representative of the government of Dubai , or at all -LRB- other than in the context of projects outside Dubai , eg a smelter project in Iran -RRB- ; and there are no documents relating to the proposed Valo sales agency .
\ tMr Farhad Pochkhanawala , Dubal \ 's finance manager since 1989 , also provided a witness statement in which he said that as finance manager he became a member of the Pricing Committee , whose role was to review market information and advise on pricing and hedging strategies for the benefit of Mr Livingstone and Mr Alawi , the sales manager .
\ tFirst , each of Mr Salaam , Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir claimed to have been the instrumental party in effecting the alliance with Richco through an initial approach to Marc Rich .
Mr Al Tajir , on the other hand , said that although the initial idea of an alliance with Richco had come from Mr Livingstone , it was he , Mr Al Tajir , who had made the initial contact with his friend and neighbour Mr Rich .
And Mr Livingstone said that it was he himself who had both developed the strategy of an alliance with Richco and had negotiated it with Mr Rich , who was personally known to him .
That was Mr Salaam \ 's view of the matter , that it had been Mr Al Tajir who had set up the initial meeting that he and Mr Livingstone attended with Mr Rich in Zug .
Mr Livingstone may have been Dubal \ 's chief executive , but it was Mr Rich and Mr Al Tajir who were the world business men , principals rather than employees : and it seems to me to be altogether more likely that the meetings of 26/27 May 1987 in Zug had been preceded by some private conversation between Mr Rich and Mr Al Tajir .
That was in a sense also Mr Strothotte \ 's understanding from Mr Rich , that Mr Al Tajir had been involved -LRB- as well as the two visitors to Zug -RRB- : but I pay less regard to that , since Mr Strothotte was obviously mistaken to think , as he had originally said , that Mr Rich had reported having had a joint meeting with Messrs Al Tajir , Livingstone and Salaam in Zug ; and in any event what Mr Rich said to Mr Strothotte was merely hearsay .
\ tSecondly , if Mr Al Tajir made the initial contact with Mr Rich , it is nevertheless reasonably clear that the original concept of the alliance came from Mr Livingstone , or at any rate developed out of his conversations and discussions with Mr Al Tajir and/or Mr Salaam .
It is also a matter of common sense : it was Mr Livingstone who alone of the three lived his whole business life in the world of Dubal .
Following Mr Livingstone \ 's departure from Dubal and Dubai , Mr Salaam was able to offer him a consultancy appointment with GRC .
Mr Al Tajir \ 's stance is the most clear cut , in that he seeks to say that his 40 % was negotiated directly with Mr Rich as the price he charged to Richco for introducing it to Dubal .
It seemed to me that politically , or for some other reason , it was unacceptable for Dubal to pay direct , and the concept of State companies in developing countries distributing funds to favoured individuals or companies was consistent with what I had heard about such dealings ... '' \ tMr Livingstone , perhaps even more than Mr Salaam , accepted that the fees were being paid by Dubal , rather than Richco .
\ tUltimately , the fact that both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone relied on the authority of Mr Al Tajir and on the custom and practice of Dubai showed that their thesis was that their commissions or other payments came from Dubal , rather than Richco .
\ tSixthly , for reasons which I have already sought to make plain , the reliance which both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone , and through Mr Strothotte to some lesser extent also Richco , sought to place on the authority of Mr Al Tajir as representative of the Ruler of Dubai and owner of Dubal can not be accepted .
Mr Al Tajir was no longer vested with that authority : and it is impossible to accept that Mr Livingstone or Mr Salaam , or even Mr Rich , can have supposed that Mr Al Tajir was still vested with the Ruler \ 's authority .
It contains a helpful summary of all sums received by Richco pursuant to the Richco consultancy agreement and paid out by Richco pursuant to the subsidiary agreements , as well as , in addition , details of the further payments made by Richco of $ 10 per tonne of alumina sold to Dubal by Clarendon .
Mr Horat said that for internal accounting purposes `` there would have been a transfer by Richco to Clarendon of the funds received from Dubal under the Consultancy Agreement to enable Clarendon to make payment out to the Beneficiaries .
\ tFor the most part , payments by Richco -LRB- by which I mean to embrace , for the reason just stated , payments made by Clarendon -RRB- were made within a few days after the corresponding payment was received by Richco from Dubal .
On 4 September 1987 Dubal paid to Richco , and on 8 September 1987 Richco paid on to Valo at the Fidelity Bank , London , the mobilisation fee of $ 2m and the first monthly payment of $ 85,000 .
\ tOn 15 December 1989 Richco -LRB- Clarendon -RRB- paid $ 1,400,000 to an account number 12.822 in the name of `` J Diem '' held at Bank fur Handel und Effekten , Zurich .
It appears to be linked in that schedule in some way with a similar payment , also ascribed to the $ 5s , made by Richco -LRB- Clarendon -RRB- to Al Tajir Ltd on 23 February 1990 : in that case too there appears to be no payment from Dubal to Richco in the same or similar amount either shortly before or after that date .
This shows that the $ 1,400,000 is a prepayment in respect of an estimated quantity of 300,000 tonnes of alumina to be supplied by Clarendon to Dubal in calendar 1990 : 300,000 x $ 5 = $ 1,500,000 , from which $ 100,000 was discounted for early payment .
\ tMr Livingstone was also questioned in this context about documents showing that he and Mr Salaam were in account with one another regarding an investment in the Fidelity Bank Building , Philadelphia , which Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir had originally bought in partnership together .
It is not clear if this is the same sum as was transferred by Richco -LRB- Clarendon -RRB- to Mr Salaam at Bank fur Handel -LRB- the identity of the amount and the closeness of the dates are intriguing -RRB- , or whether it is a different sum of $ 1,400,000 .
\ t -LRB- 2 -RRB- In respect of the $ 5s : \ t \ t $ 2,312,733 to Al Tajir Ltd -LRB- Mr Al Tajir -RRB- \ t \ t $ 1,623,789 to Mr Salaam -LRB- at Bank fur Handel -RRB- \ t \ t $ 762,789 to Utary -LRB- Mr Livingstone -RRB- \ t \ t $ 1,082,525 to Saad Salaam \ t -LRB- 3 -RRB- In respect of the monthly payments of $ 85,000 : \ t \ t $ 1,501,213 to Mr Salaam -LRB- at Bank fur Handel -RRB- \ t \ t $ 1,574,771 to Utary -LRB- Mr Livingstone -RRB- .
The figure is made up as follows : \ t -LRB- a -RRB- \ tValo -LRB- the mobilisation fee of $ 2m and six monthly payments of $ 85,000 -RRB- : \ t \ t $ 2,510,000 \ t -LRB- b -RRB- \ tNillet -LRB- 35 monthly payments of $ 85,000 -RRB- : \ t $ 2,975,000 -LSB- 16 -RSB- \ t -LRB- c -RRB- \ tJMS -LRB- the payments in respect of 2.5 % commission and the $ 5s and $ 2s , made to JMS \ 's account at Fidelity Bank , London and latterly First City Bank , Houston -RRB- : \ t \ t $ 8,270,985.33 -LSB- 17 -RSB- \ t -LRB- d -RRB- \ tMr Salaam personally -LRB- the payments made into his account at Bank fur Handel -RRB- : \ t $ 8,090,303 \ t -LRB- e -RRB- \ tMr Salaam personally or through his companies -LRB- items -LRB- a -RRB- , -LRB- b -RRB- , -LRB- c -RRB- and -LRB- d -RRB- above -RRB- : \ t $ 21,846,488.39 -LSB- 18 -RSB- -LRB- 6 -RRB- Mr Saad Salaam received -LRB- at Banque Gutzwiller -RRB- the total sum of $ 6,001,861.28 .
This was the figure adopted by Dubal , accepted Mr Livingstone , and not disputed by Mr Salaam or the other parties .
It is possible , however , or even likely , that prior to November 1990 Mr Livingstone received additional sums under the scheme , indirectly from Dubal , through JMS .
-LRB- 9 -RRB- The two sums of $ 1,400,000 and $ 1,296,944 , paid in respect of the $ 5s in the former case to Mr Salaam -LRB- at Bank fur Handel -RRB- in December 1989 and in the latter to Al Tajir Ltd in February 1990 , are included in the above figures as receipts of Mr Salaam and of Mr Al Tajir respectively .
As to the former , a third party will be liable as a constructive trustee if he is the recipient beneficially of trust property or of assets representing that property , in the knowledge that the property of which he is in receipt is traceable to a breach of trust or fiduciary relationship : see Agip -LRB- Africa -RRB- Ltd v. Jackson -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 Ch 265 -LRB- Millett J -RRB- , -LSB- 1991 -RSB- Ch 547 -LRB- CA -RRB- , El Ajou v. Dollar Land Holdings -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 2 All E R 685 .
As to this issue , Lord Nicholls pointed out that the jumping-off point had been Lord Selborne LC \ 's famous dictum in Barnes v. Addy -LRB- 1874 -RRB- LR 9 Ch App 244 at 251/2 that - '' ... strangers are not to be made constructive trustees ... unless they assist with knowledge in a dishonest and fraudulent design on the part of the trustees .
\ tNevertheless , it was submitted by Mr Davis on behalf of the Salaam defendants that Lord Nicholls was mistaken , and that their Lordships \ ' advice in the Privy Council in Tan could not be reconciled with binding authority in the court of appeal in cases such as Belmont Finance Corporation Ltd v. Williams Furniture Ltd -LSB- 1979 -RSB- Ch 250 , eg at 267G , where Buckley LJ said : '' -LSB- Lord Selborne LC \ 's -RSB- formulation has stood for more than 100 years .
In Tan the privy council reviewed all lines of earlier authority , and preferred the test of dishonesty to other fault-based principles , relying in this connection on the Belmont case itself -LRB- at 388B/E -RRB- : but that still left open for further refinement the question of the test of dishonesty itself .
In Arab Monetary Fund v. Hashim -LRB- unreported , 29 July 1994 -RRB- Chadwick J -LRB- at 45/6 of the transcript -RRB- said this : \ t `` The second requirement , as it seems to me , was that the English Court must have satisfied itself that there was no rule of law of any relevant foreign law which - in the words of Lord Pearson in Boys v. Chaplin -LRB- supra , -LSB- 1971 -RSB- AC 356 , 397 -RRB- - would provide a defence to the AMF \ 's cause of action ; or - as it might , perhaps , be put in the context of a Barnes v. Addy constructive trust claim - would make it inequitable to hold that an FNBC defendant should be treated as if it were a trustee .
As it is , Dubal made it clear that , while it only had to meet the test in Tan , what it alleged against Mr Salaam was actual dishonesty , the subjective knowledge that what he was participating in was dishonest `` theft '' .
Tan makes clear that a fiduciary may well be in breach without being himself dishonest : but for the purposes of the contribution proceedings the question of Mr Livingstone \ 's honesty was itself in issue .
Mr El Fadl was born in Kuwait and is now an American citizen and member of the Pennsylvania and New Jersey bars .
He is also a member of the Committee on Islamic and International Law of the American Branch of the International Law Association , an adjunct Professor of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law at the University of Texas , and a consultant to the law firm of Medhat Abou El Fadl in Cairo .
Instead , reliance is there placed on passages from the evidence of Mr Livingstone , Mr Salaam , Mr Strothotte and Mr Briggs to the effect that commissions were part of the accepted culture of Dubai .
I would merely add that , if I had received compelling evidence , tested under cross-examination , that payments of the kind and size of the payments in this case were acceptable under Dubai custom and practice even in the absence of the clear consent of the owners of the business concerned , I would have had to consider to what extent such evidence was relevant to transactions for the most part negotiated in Switzerland , evidenced by agreements expressly made subject to English law , and performed by the making of payments in Switzerland , England and the USA .
There was no dispute that Mr Livingstone was in a fiduciary relationship with Dubal , or that he had participated in the making of the Richco consultancy agreement , the setting up of the scheme , and the receiving of payments under it .
\ tIn my judgment , the fact that he was in breach of his fiduciary duty to Dubal must follow from my rejection of the submission that in acting as he did he was acting with the authority of Mr Al Tajir as a representative of the Ruler of Dubai .
Mr Livingstone was the chief executive of Dubal and lived in Dubai .
He must have been aware of this all the more because the fall or at least departure of Mr Al Tajir from his previous official , governmental and personal status as the Ruler \ 's representative was in my judgment the reason why the GRC management agreement began to unravel : and that was a matter in which Mr Livingstone was intimately involved both as the chief executive of Dubal and by reason of his personal interest in the profits of that agreement .
The very fact that Mr Livingstone has staked so much on his contention and his evidence that Mr Al Tajir still retained his former status , or that he at least believed him to have done so , at any rate in relation to Dubal , means , with my rejection of that contention and evidence , that Mr Livingstone has been shown to have taken up a false position : and that is symptomatic of his lack of honesty in relation to the scheme .
I can not accept that Mr Livingstone was not aware that a new regime had come to power in Dubai , that that was reflected in a change in the power structure in Dubal , and that the creaming off of Dubal \ 's funds by means of the GRC agreement was unacceptable in the new climate .
As Mr Livingstone was at times candid enough to admit , the GRC agreement was `` a means of abstracting cash from Dubal '' , and involved the theft of money from Dubal -LRB- `` If you wish to put it that way '' -RRB- .
In my judgment , the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements were structured as they were , with Mr Livingstone \ 's dishonest complicity , in order to disguise the fact that this scheme was but a further and more refined device for abstracting Dubal \ 's money : for on this occasion the abstraction was to operate under the cloak of an apparently arms-length agreement with an independent partner in the form of Richco .
Under the Richco scheme , no one at Dubal , except for Mr Livingstone himself , was supposed to know that most of the funds paid out by Dubal to Richco was to end up in the hands of Mr Livingstone and the other beneficiaries of the scheme .
This was so both when he was first questioned about the Richco consultancy agreement in 1992 before he left Dubal , and when he was sued by Dubal in the Livingstone proceedings .
I can not accept that Mr Al Tajir would have sought to lead Mr Salaam into the belief , or leave him disabused in the belief , that he retained his former role within the government of Dubai or in the affairs of Dubal .
He knew that Mr Livingstone was responsible to Dubal and its owners for its proper management , and that his participation in a scheme for diverting its assets under the guise of a `` strategic partnership '' with Richco was dishonest .
Even if the earning of an unofficial bonus could be regarded as a legitimate part of the mores of Dubai business life , at any rate when authorised by Dubal \ 's owners , Mr Salaam knew that the immense sums allotted to Mr Livingstone were not the payment of a bonus , but the price of an indispensable partner in dishonesty .
Moreover , if Mr Salaam \ 's share of the payments routed through Dubal was the payment of an introductory commission to him , what were the payments to Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir .
The fact is , as Mr Livingstone accepted but Mr Salaam continued to deny , that the scheme was a device for abstracting money from Dubal , and that Mr Salaam together with Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir divided up the spoils by agreement between themselves .
It was Mr Salaam who went to Zug with Mr Livingstone in May 1987 to negotiate the scheme with Mr Rich .
His evidence was rather that he played a purely facilitative role in bringing Dubal and Richco together , for which he had stipulated a fee by way of commission negotiated directly , and separately , with Marc Rich himself .
In my view it would be unrealistic to accept that evidence ; but be that as it may , in my view the inference is inescapable that Richco , through Mr Marc Rich himself , must have had a full understanding of the scheme , including the fact that the ultimate beneficiaries were to include Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone as well as Mr Al Tajir .
It was again with Mr Rich that Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone had their initial discussions when they visited Zug in May 1987 .
\ tMr Strothotte \ 's evidence was to some extent ambivalent about whether the scheme was regarded by Richco as one that it could honestly enter into : as essentially redounding to Dubal \ 's benefit and in reliance on Mr Al Tajir \ 's `` political standing '' , Mr Livingstone \ 's executive authority , and Mr Amhurst \ 's professional reputation ; or whether it was recognised as being flawed by dishonesty in its very conception .
Thus he said -LRB- at day 6 , pages 11/12 -RRB- : `` Q. \ tAs far as you were aware , and I am talking about you and Richco , the authority within Dubal to conclude the commercial alliance , you saw that authority , first of all , in Mr Livingstone , as chief executive .
\ tTo some extent Richco must get credit , even though it was acting under the exigencies of seeking to preserve its commercial relationship with Dubal , for being willing both to accommodate Dubal \ 's concerns about the agreements entered into under Mr Livingstone \ 's stewardship and to provide information to Dubal to enable it to pursue its claims .
It will be recalled that the Amhurst defendants had for the purpose of the contribution proceedings divided into two separate interests : Mr Amhurst himself , now represented by Mr Leggatt ; and ABMN and ABC excluding Mr Amhurst , whom Mr Boswood continued to represent -LRB- the `` Amhurst partners '' -RRB- .
\ tIn the present case it was not disputed , on the basis of my unreasoned findings , that Mr Salaam , Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir -LRB- and for that matter Richco too at such time as Mr Salaam was claiming contribution from it -RRB- were all persons liable in respect of the same damage suffered by Dubal for the purposes of section 1 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Act , and could therefore each claim contribution against the other or could each be the subject of a claim for contribution by any other .
\ tI also bear in mind that , receipts apart , I have found that Mr Salaam \ 's dishonest assistance led to Dubal \ 's gross loss of $ 50,117,622 , that Mr Livingstone , Mr Al Tajir and Richco were dishonest participants in the scheme , that Mr Amhurst must be treated as dishonestly assisting the scheme in his role as a solicitor , and that each of them played an important and substantial , and not merely peripheral or incidental , role in the scheme -LRB- Unreasoned Finding para 10 -RRB- .
Dubal submitted that the credit should be regarded as no more than the sum which Mr Livingstone has been found to have received under the Richco scheme , namely $ 6,327,918 .
It was submitted on behalf of Mr Livingstone , however , that the whole of the sum of $ 15,540,000 paid under the Livingstone settlement ought to be regarded as credited to Dubal for the purpose of its present claim in these proceedings .
It is true that the claims in the Livingstone action embraced matters which went much wider than the payments made under the Richco consultancy agreement alone : it is possible therefore that some , most or even all of Dubal \ 's recovery under the Livingstone settlement could have been properly allocated to claims other than Dubal \ 's claim in these proceedings .
If , therefore , it wishes to say that the $ 15,540,000 received from Mr Livingstone should not be credited to its present claim , but should be apportioned in some way across the whole gamut of the claims made in the Livingstone proceedings , then I think that Dubal bears that burden of proof .
At that time , however , I did have to hand calculations which Dubal had provided illustrating the build-up of interest month by month on the basis of simple interest at 1 % , alternatively 2 % , over the prevailing US dollar LIBOR for 3 month deposits , and also on the basis of the same alternative rates applied to interest compounded at annual rests .
Mr Livingstone therefore paid Dubal approximately 22.8 % of its original claim .
Mr Amhurst was a solicitor , and a director of a number of companies in Mr Salaam \ 's group , including Valo ; he represented to Richco that he held powers of attorney for Nillet and JMS ; he drafted or dictated the drafting of the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements and was involved with Mr Livingstone in their negotiation , so much so that he `` appeared to be part of the Dubal team '' ; he informed Richco that it was required to concur in the scheme if it was to do business in Dubai or with Dubal ; he knew and made known to Richco that it was not expected to supply services pursuant to its consultancy agreement or to be supplied with services under the subsidiary agreements and that the scheme was a mere vehicle for payment , and thus knew that the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements were shams ; he executed the subsidiary agreements on behalf of the Salaam companies ; thereafter he was `` centrally involved in the administration '' of the scheme , eg by giving instructions to Richco concerning the payment of money .
Mr Salaam , Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir -LRB- but not Richco or Mr Amhurst -RRB- submitted that on the facts pleaded by Dubal against the Amhurst partners they could not have been made liable to Dubal .
In para 7.6 of its points of claim Dubal had pleaded as follows : `` Further or in the alternative to the previous paragraph hereof , at trial , Dubal will say that the firms of ABMN and ABC are liable to Dubal to the same extent as is Amhurst in respect of those acts or omissions alleged against him in section 6 above as were committed by him while a partner therein , to the extent that such acts alleged against him were carried out by him in the ordinary course of ABMN \ 's and/or ABC \ 's business .
\ tOn the other hand , it is submitted on behalf of the Amhurst partners -LRB- supported by Mr Amhurst and Richco -RRB- that the drafting of contracts is plainly within the ordinary business of solicitors , even if that is done as part of a scheme of dishonest assistance to a breach of trust ; that there is nothing to prevent a firm or company being vicariously liable for such dishonest assistance and that section 10 is intended to deal with vicarious liability in general ; that the line of authority relied on by the opposing parties was of uncertain value in the light of the principles vindicated for instance in Lloyd v. Grace Smith -LSB- 1912 -RSB- AC 716 , and had in any event not been followed in the most recent case of Agip -LRB- Africa -RRB- Ltd v. Jackson & Others -LSB- 1990 -RSB- Ch 265 , -LSB- 1991 -RSB- Ch 547 -LRB- CA -RRB- .
On that basis I do not consider Mr Wignall should be regarded as a constructive trustee and liable to account ... '' \ tOn the other side Mr Boswood cites Agip -LRB- Africa -RRB- Ltd v. Jackson -LSB- 1990 -RSB- Ch 265 , -LSB- 1991 -RSB- Ch 547 where Millett J at first instance and the court of appeal found an accountant , Bowers , vicariously liable for the dishonest assistance of his partner , Jackson , as well as of his employee , Griffin : at 296E , 570D .
It has to be said that there appears to have been no dispute that the vicarious liability of Bowers followed automatically upon the liability of his partner , and there is no citation in the judgments of the Partnership Act or of Mara v. Browne and In re Bell \ 's Indenture .
\ tI was also referred to LINDLEY & BANKS , 17th Edition , 1995 , at 12-21 , 12-29 , 12-118 and 12-141 and SNELL \ 's Equity , 29th Edition , 1990 , at 194 , where Mara v. Browne and In re Bell \ 's Indenture are cited without criticism , and to UNDERHILL and HAYTON , Law Relating to Trusts and Trustees , 15th Edition , 1995 , where , on the other hand , it is remarked that In re Bell \ 's Indenture has been criticised on the ground that the trust money had been received by the firm in the course of its business , and reference was made to Agip .
\ tI have to confess that I can not see any reason in principle why a Barnes v. Addy type of accessory liability for breach of trust should not be at least capable of giving rise to vicarious liability in circumstances where a partner guilty of accessory liability has acted in the ordinary course of his partnership business .
That , however , is a familiar problem , or at any rate has become so since the landmark decision in Lloyd v. Grace Smith -LSB- 1912 -RSB- AC 716 .
Lloyd v. Grace Smith concerned the case of an employee , and a slightly earlier decision , Hamlyn v. John Houston & Co -LSB- 1903 -RSB- 1 KB 81 -LRB- CA -RRB- concerned the case of a partner .
In due course , Lloyd v. Grace Smith was also decided on the same ground , interpreting Barwick v. English Joint Stock Bank -LRB- an authority which the House of Lords said had been misunderstood , see at 725 , 731 -RRB- as standing in the line of authorities going back to Holt CJ \ 's famous dictum in Hern v. Nichol -LRB- undated , c1700 -RRB- 1 Salk 289 that - `` for seeing that somebody must be a loser by this deceit , it is more reason that he that employs and puts a trust and confidence in the deceiver should be the loser than a stranger .
\ tThere is of course a line to be drawn between the Lloyd v. Grace Smith situation , where the employer has given the employee apparent authority to commit the tort , and the Ruben v. Great Fingall Consolidated -LSB- 1906 -RSB- AC 439 situation , where the servant has merely taken the opportunity afforded by his service to commit some wrong otherwise than in the course of doing that class of acts which he was employed to do : see Morris v. Martin -LSB- 1966 -RSB- 1 QB 716 at 727 , 737 , Armagas v. Mundogas -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 1 AC 717 .
In Lloyd v. Grace Smith Lord Macnaghten at 738/9 referred to the incidence of insurance as relevant to his considerations .
Examples of such full indemnities are cited , eg Lister v. Romford Ice and Cold Storage Company Ltd -LSB- 1957 -RSB- AC 555 , where Viscount Simonds and Lord Morton thought that an alternative route under which the employer could obtain a complete indemnity from its negligent employee was under the predecessor Act , the Law Reform -LRB- Married Women and Tortfeasors -RRB- Act 1935 -LRB- the `` Act of 1935 '' -RRB- : see at 579/580 and 584/5 .
`` Responsibility '' has been held to cover both causative potency and blameworthiness : Madden v. Quirke -LSB- 1989 -RSB- 1 WLR 702 at 707E , Downs v. Chappell -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 WLR 426 at 445H .
In any event , playing paymaster to the others was , as Mr Amhurst explained , the key to business with Dubal and in Dubai .
Given the arm-lock that Dubal had on Mr Livingstone in the form of a world-wide Mareva injunction , it may be that Mr Livingstone did not have all that much choice about what happened next : but the fact remains that Mr Livingstone decided not to defend his position , but to come to terms .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 12 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 Mr Strothotte thought that he had been told by Mr Rich and Mr Green that the meeting also embraced Mr Al Tajir , but he was prepared to accept that he might have been mistaken about that .
In the end , however , it makes no difference , because the additional $ 85,000 is either properly to be attributed to Nillet , or , as Dubal \ 's points of claim and Mr Horat \ 's appendix 3 have recorded it , to Mr Salaam personally at Bank fur Handel .
I obtained that figure from para 6 of Mr Davis \ ' Outline Closing Submissions on behalf of the Salaam defendants , citing Mr Neal \ 's report at para 12 .
They appear to have been ignored on the ground that they related to the ASA and were paid by Clarendon .
Justice Carnwath : \ tOn 2nd March 1998 the Secretary of State presented a petition for the winding up of Market Wizard Systems -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd -LRB- `` the Company '' -RRB- in the public interest .
In Walter L. Jacob and Co -LSB- 1989 -RSB- BCLC 345 , Nicholls LJ explained that the Court has to carry out a `` balancing exercise '' , and that , although the Court will be assisted by the evidence and submissions of the Secretary of State , supported by the expertise of his Department , it is ultimately to the Court that Parliament has entrusted the task of evaluating the evidence and deciding whether it affords sufficient reason for making a winding up order -LRB- p 353 -RRB- .
\ r \ n \ tIn early 1997 Mr Smith and his wife , on a visit to their daughter who was living and working in London , decided to open up a family business in London , which their daughter \ 's fianc \ xc3 \ xa9 , Mr Kevin Necessian , would run .
Because of difficulties in obtaining an extension of Mr Necessian \ 's work permit to enable him to run the business , he and Mr Smith \ 's daughter returned to Australia .
By this time Mr Smith had been introduced to Mr Wade , an English solicitor , and Mr Reichelt , who worked for him .
Mr Reichelt was described as `` general manager '' ; Mr Wade as company secretary and solicitor .
Further , for each additional \ xc2 \ xa350 ,000 , \ xc2 \ xa310 ,000 is required to be repaid to Arecki Pty Ltd. '' \ tThat was signed for Arecki by Mr Simpson , their financial controller and Mr Smith \ 's main financial adviser in Australia ; and for Market Wizard Systems UK Ltd by Mrs Smith .
\ r \ n \ tIn October Mr Reichelt had some discussions with Mr Cridland of Astwick and Co , with regard to the requirements of the FSA .
On 17th October Mr Wade confirmed that he was prepared to fulfil the role of compliance officer `` to oversee the sales procedures at -LRB- the Company -RRB- and to ensure compliance with the provisions of the FSA 1986 and the directions of Astwick and Co. '' Standard `` Compliance Forms '' were prepared for completion by sales staff , and checking by Mr Wade .
\ r \ n \ tThe Department \ 's enquiries began on 23rd October and their representatives interviewed Mr Reichelt and Mr Smith at the company \ 's premises on 23rd , 24th and 30th October .
Neither Mr Smith nor Mrs Smith were present at this interview , both being in Australia at the time .
\ r \ n \ tMr Day and Mr Smith had previously been involved in an ASC investigation with a company called Multivest System Pty Ltd , which offered computerised systems for trading in futures .
The Secretary of State submits that Mr Reichelt took part in or was concerned in the management of the company and that the company either had knowledge of that , or , in the person of Mr Smith , `` turned a blind eye '' to Mr Reichelt \ 's background .
I continued : `` The company \ 's response in more recent affidavits of Mr Robinson and Mr Reichelt , is to claim that his role is purely administrative , and that the management of the business has been carried out entirely by Mr Robinson .
\ tAlthough I was not aware of this when giving that judgment , Mr Robinson and Mr Reichelt were also involved at that time in the activities of a company called Interdata UK Ltd , which was promoting a computer programme called Alpha-XL , intended to assist customers in trading on the ordinary stock market .
In this Mr Robinson was shown as chairman and Mr Reichelt as `` general manager '' .
He had permission from the Department of Employment to be employed by Mr Wade as an `` international legal consultant '' .
The precise nature of the arrangements between Mr Wade and Mr Reichelt were not entirely clear from the evidence .
It seems that Mr Wade provided Mr Reichelt with a flat and living expenses , and additional payments which apparently varied according to what Mr Wade was able to pay .
\ r \ n \ tMr Wade and Mr Reichelt were introduced to Mr Smith in April 1997 by a business acquaintance .
According to Mr Reichelt , Mr Smith was aware of his previous involvement with Comstrad , but not that he was bankrupt or of the disqualification which went with it .
He did not mention Mr Reichelt \ 's bankrupt status to Mr Smith , because it did not appear to him to be of any importance , Mr Reichelt not being an officer of the company .
He regarded Mr Reichelt as `` a very smart man '' , with a good record as a lawyer and a businessman in Queensland .
\ r \ n \ tEven if one accepts Mr Reichelt \ 's evidence that he referred all management decisions to Mr Smith , it is quite clear in my view that he was at least `` concerned in the management '' in the sense explained in the authorities .
\ r \ n \ tPerhaps the clearest indication of Mr Reichelt \ 's central role is in relation to the `` compliance meetings '' which he attended with Mr Wade and Mr Cridland .
Thus for example in the minutes of the meeting on 3rd November it is recorded that - \ r \ n '' -LRB- Mr Reichelt -RRB- agreed that as general manager of MWS , in charge of office administration , he would undertake to implement recommended procedural changes and report any known breaches of agreed procedures to the compliance officer who would then decide if it was a matter which required specific reference to Astwick and company .
Yet it was to Mr Wade , Mr Reichelt and Mr Cridland , all of whom had been deeply involved with Comstrad and Interdata , that he deliberately entrusted the compliance aspects of his business .
\ r \ n \ tI find it difficult to understand why Mr Smith should have adopted this course particularly against the background of his difficulties with ASC in Australia .
Mr Reichelt and Mr Wade on the other hand I found to be unreliable witnesses .
They must have been well aware that Mr Smith , in view of his extensive business interests in Australia , required something more than an administrative clerk .
Unfortunately , Mr Smith was won over by Mr Wade , whom he saw as `` a lovely English gentleman ... a solicitor on The Strand '' .
There was an affidavit from Mr Simpson , who is Mr Smith \ 's financial adviser in Australia , but he also was not called .
The most recent information , provided to Mr Alexander by Mr Simpson in a letter of 12th June , shows a total of $ 561,591.53 , including payments by Mr Smith direct , by WSA and by Arecki Property Ltd .
Thus , the March 1998 balance sheet reproduced in the Official Receiver \ 's report shows net liabilities of \ xc2 \ xa3106 ,202.49 , while the balance sheet attached to Mr Alexander \ 's report , which had been prepared by Mr Simpson , showed an excess of liabilities over assets of \ xc2 \ xa3164 ,740 .
Mr Alexander \ 's view was that the balance sheet test was irrelevant because , as he put it : \ r \ n `` If the unsecured loans from Mr Smith personally in his Australian companies , which are not currently due or payable , were excluded from the balance sheet it would show an excess of assets over liabilities ... '' -LRB- report para 3.12 -RRB- .
\ tMr Smith \ 's response to these points was two-fold : first , any deficiencies in the company \ 's accounting records were due to the failures of the accountant , and could and would have been rectified before the first year \ 's accounts were audited , had the Secretary of State not intervened ; and , secondly , that even if the loans were not fully documented , there was no question of Mr Smith withdrawing the money which he had invested in the company , and that in practice it was perfectly capable of meeting its debts as they fell due .
Not to engage the services of Mr Reichelt or Mr Wade .
I would in any event be unwilling to accept the undertakings without some further evidence as to how the accounting deficiencies are going to be rectified , and who in the absence of Mr Reichelt and Mr Wade is going to be responsible for the day-to-day management of the company .
That was the view of SIB itself in the guidance it wrote regarding PII cover in its October 1994 report -LRB- quoted above -RRB- , viz - \ r \ n \ t `` Such notice may need to be given in the course of a case review , depending on what emerges ... '' \ tIn the meantime , JRA appear to have been confident in their own procedures : witness the fact that transfers appear to have been effected in the period between the KPMG report and the TSW letter , also what JRA wrote to Mr Mowbray on 19 December 1994 , viz \ r \ n \ t `` we have already carried out extensive internal reviews and have satisfied ourselves that , in our view , the majority of our investors have been given `` best advice '' ... '' Moreover , JRA were not moved to give notice by prior warnings , such as Lautro \ 's Enforcement Bulletin 14 , which spoke of `` the potential problem '' , or EB16 , which spoke to `` the size of the overall problem '' .
\ tIn Thorman v. New Hampshire Insurance Co -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 7 complaints were made in 1976 against the plaintiff architects regarding cracking of brickwork .
The dispute between the parties arises out of the carriage of a cargo of fruit in the vessel Baltic Universal from Seattle and Port Canaveral to Rotterdam between December 1995 and January 1996 .
`` BALTIC UNIVERSAL '' - Bill of Lading ROT-6 16.12.95 at Seattle Bill of Lading ROT-7 16.12.95 at Seattle Bill of Lading PC-01 30.12.95 at Port Canaveral We are instructed on behalf of the subrogated underwriters -LRB- Allianz in Hamburg -RRB- of two consignments of pears and a consignment of grapefruit carried from Everett and Port Canaveral to Rotterdam on board the m.v .
Also on 9th January Waltons wrote to Mr. Baskerville appointing him as arbitrator on behalf of the applicants .
There followed some telephone conversations concerning parallel proceedings which had been commenced in the Netherlands which led Waltons to write to the Club again on 20th January in the following terms : '' \ tFurther to our recent telephone conversations we have received confirmation from Dr. Dolk that the proceedings commenced in the Netherlands were issued purely to protect time .
On 24th January the Club notified Waltons of the appointment of Mr. O \ ` Donovan as the respondents \ ' arbitrator and a few days later it provided a letter of undertaking by way of security for the claim in terms which were acceptable to Waltons as the applicants \ ' solicitors .
The Aghios Lazaros was employed to carry a cargo of oranges from Greece to Rotterdam and/or Hamburg under a charter which contained a clause paramount and an arbitration clause in these terms : '' \ tIf any dispute arises during the performance of this charterparty and can not be solved amicably , -LSB- the same -RSB- shall be referred to arbitration in London '' .
However , the broad approach of the Court of Appeal in the Nea Agrex case , and in particular the judgment of Lord Denning \ xc2 \ xa0M.R. , has been applied in many subsequent cases , the most notable of which for present purposes is Peter Cremer G.m.b.H .
That case concerned a contract of affreightment for the carriage of pipes from Port Kembla in New South Wales to Kuantan in Malaysia .
Mr. Parsons for the applicants in this case submitted that Judge Jack \ 's decision on this point was wrong and should not be followed .
Mr. Parsons submitted that whatever may be said about the letter of 9th January , the letter of 20th January did expressly call upon the Club to agree to the appointment of Mr. Baskerville and therefore did on any view expressly comply with the requirements of the Limitation Act .
If one of the parties fails to appoint an Arbitrator - either originally or by way of substitution - for two weeks after the other party having appointed his Arbitrator has sent the party making default notice by mail , cable or telex to make the appointment , the party appointing the third Arbitrator shall , after application from the party having appointed his Arbitrator , also appoint an Arbitrator on behalf of the party making default ... '' On 18 March 1992 , after some intervening correspondence , SAC replied : `` Concerning your initiation of arbitration , our clients do not wish any of the 3 gentlemen you have proposed to sit as sole Arbitrator and accordingly when you have effected an appointment of your clients \ ' arbitrator and given us due notification of the same we shall attend to the appointment of the Respondents \ ' arbitrator within 14 days thereafter in accordance with clause 15 ... On 3 April 1992 HFW informed SAC that they had appointed Mr Kazantzis as Roussos \ 's arbitrator , and on 6 April SAC replied to say that they had appointed Mr Newcomb as Willies \ 's arbitrator .
To that telex SAC replied by letter dated 21 May 1992 to Mr Kazantzis , with copies to Mr Newcomb and to HFW : `` We are in receipt of Messrs Holman Fenwick and Willan \ 's telex yesterday in which they purport to extend your appointment to cover any claims by a party identified as Ocean Laser Shipping Limited .
It appears from this letter that SAC had consulted their clients , Willie , about the purported claim of Ocean Laser .
`` The Memorandum of Agreement states in lines 1 to 2 that G Roussos Sons SA , of 1 Dimosthenous Street , Piraeus , Greece or company to be nominated hereinafter called the `` Buyer '' , have today bought Motor Vessel `` CELTIC AMBASSADOR '' .
Thus even after HFW had finally explained the basis of Ocean Laser \ 's joining with Roussos in making claim under the MOA , Willie continued to throw down their jurisdictional gauntlet .
However , having considered the Nea Agrex case , he concluded that he was not bound to follow Lord Denning \ 's view that a notice of request to appoint could be implied as well as express , since , even though it was in his view part of Lord Denning \ 's ratio decidendi , it was not , he thought , shared by the other members of the Court of Appeal .
On behalf of Willie , Mr Michael Nolan submitted precisely to the contrary : that Vosnoc was rightly decided and only an express request would suffice ; that in any event neither telex nor letter could be construed as an implied request , and that even if either of them would otherwise be construed as such , it could not take effect since it was addressed not to Willie but merely copied to Willie \ 's solicitors in the Roussos arbitration , SAC , who had no authority from Willie to receive a notice commencing a further arbitration on behalf of Ocean Laser ; and that the Limitation Act laid down the sole means by which an arbitration could be commenced .
Whether because he regarded himself as directly applying a statutory code , or because he was influenced by Mr Justice Kerr \ 's dictum in Surrendra Overseas Ltd v. Government of Sri Lanka -LSB- 1977 -RSB- 1 WLR at 570 that `` For the purposes of limitation the commencement of an arbitration must be clear and unequivocal '' , a dictum strongly relied on by Mr Nolan before me , Judge Jack felt unable to give weight to those policy considerations .
This led Mr Berry to submit on behalf of Ocean Laser that an arbitration had been commenced by Ocean Laser against Willie in any event .
That began by express reference to Mr Kazantzis \ 's appointment on behalf of Roussos and thus by inference to the Roussos/Willie arbitration in which Willie had already appointed Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator .
In my judgment there can be no reasonable doubt that Willie were intended to regard this communication as a notice to respond by similarly appointing Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator in respect of Ocean Laser \ 's claims under the MOA as well as in respect of Roussos \ 's claims , and I have no doubt that that was how Willie in fact understood it , and rightly so .
In those terms , it was in theory possible , but I would have regarded it as eccentric to the point of unreasonableness , for Willie to have appointed a different arbitrator than Mr Newcomb .
The fact , therefore , that , by impliedly or in substance calling upon Willie to appoint Mr Newcomb in respect of Ocean Laser \ 's claims as well , Ocean Laser may have been applying the wrong formula in their invocation of arbitration , does not seem to me to matter at all : see Nea Agrex and Mannai , as well as The Petr Schmidt -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 202 at 207 per Potter J .
Or it may be that they were taking for granted that , unless they heard to the contrary , Willie would indeed recognise Mr Newcomb \ 's jurisdiction in respect of the Ocean Laser claim .
It is another to submit , as Mr Nolan does , that Willie did not know , or rather that it was reasonable for them not to have understood , that they were being requested , if they had not already done so , to appoint Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator in respect of the Ocean Laser claim as well .
If the question is whether it had been made reasonably clear to Willie that Ocean Laser had invoked against them a submission to arbitration in respect of their claim under the MOA and its arbitration clause , and that Willie were expected to respond to that invocation by themselves submitting that claim there and then - if they had not already done so - to the arbitral process , I find it impossible to say that that question should not be answered with a plain `` Yes '' .
If , as Lord Denning thought , a notice which says `` I require the difference between us to be submitted to arbitration '' is sufficient , then I can not see why Ocean Laser \ 's points of claim are not sufficient , - and a fortiori HFW \ 's letter in further explanation of why , in effect , Ocean Laser were entitled - and it would follow Willie were bound - to arbitrate .
Whether as a separate point or not , Mr Nolan also emphasised that the two documents were not addressed to Willie , or even to SAC , but only copied to the latter .
Such provisions , however , either precede , or in any event pay no regard to , modern means of communication such as telex or fax ; and when dealing with post require a registered letter to a `` place of abode '' in England and Wales .
However , the letter is written primarily on the assumption that Mr Newcomb had already become a member of the tribunal for Ocean Laser \ 's claim , but possibly means also that , if perchance he had not been , the explanation about Ocean Laser would lead to Willie \ 's confirmation of his appointment or their acquiescence in the tribunal \ 's jurisdiction .
For the purpose of his submission Mr Berry relied on two authorities , The Jordan Nicolov -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 11 and Baytur SA v. Finagro Holding SA -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 134 , in both of which the new party claiming to enter upon an existing arbitration was an assignee of the claimant in that arbitration .
As it is , however , I have already decided that Ocean Laser had commenced arbitration against Willie in 1992 , and Mr Nolan was able to inform me , upon instructions , that if I so decided Willie would confirm Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator .
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook said -LRB- at 499E/G -RRB- : `` The argument in relation to the first contention was that the judgment of the Dutch Court of Appeal was procedural in nature , in that it consisted only of a decision that a Dutch court had no jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the appellants \ ' claim , and did not pronounce in any way on the question whether the claim itself , or any substantive issue in it , if it were to be entertained and adjudicated on , would succeed or fail .
The matter was considered in Cargill v. Kadinopoulos -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 1 .
Lord Goff of Chieveley , with whose speech the other members of the House agreed , pointed out that the arbitrator \ 's decision had involved both findings of fact , as to whether circumstances had arisen as to whether he was called upon to exercise his discretion , and a decision as to how he should exercise that discretion .
Indeed , as Lord Justice Leggatt pointed out in the Court of Appeal , it would be unrealistic to hold otherwise .
-LSB- 3 -RSB- The question of what constitutes an award was also briefly visited , by coincidence on the very same day as Cargill v. Kadinopoulos was before the House of Lords , by Judge Diamond QC in The Trade Fortitude -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 169 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 3 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 It seems to me that this passage from Lord Goff \ 's speech in Cargill v. Kadinopoulos may support the view that I had tentatively expressed in James Lazenby & Co v. McNicholas Construction Co Ltd -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 WLR 615 at 630/1 to the effect that an award striking out a claim for want of prosecution under section 13A of the Arbitration Act 1950 would be a final determination of the claim .
b ` Introduction and facts In this action the plaintiff , Huyton S.A. -LRB- `` Huyton '' -RRB- , seeks declaratory and injunctive relief to prevent the defendant , Peter Cremer GmbH & Co. -LRB- `` Cremer '' -RRB- , from pursuing a claim which Cremer has referred to London arbitration by GAFTA .
The claim which Cremer wishes to arbitrate seeks to establish that demurrage under a sale contract entered into with Huyton should have been measured at a rate of $ 6,500 per day , rather than the $ 11,000 which Huyton insisted upon Cremer paying ; to establish further that it was not liable for all or at any rate the larger part -LRB- $ 49,000 -RRB- of the sum of $ 65,245.40 likewise paid at Huyton \ 's insistence , on account of guarantee expenses ; and to recover sums accordingly .
The factual background starts with the sale contract dated 13th September 1995 for the shipment and sale by Cremer as seller to Huyton as buyer of 30,000 mt Romanian milling wheat plus or minus 10 % at buyer \ 's option at $ 175 per mt FOB spout trimmed Constantza in September/October 1995 .
Cremer is based in Hamburg .
Huyton also had a pre-existing commitment , made 31st August 1994 , to sell to Sotisco Trading Company Limited -LRB- `` Sotisco '' -RRB- of Khartoum `` any origin milling wheat in sound good condition , crop 1993/1994 or 1994/1995 at sellers option at $ 225 per mt C+FFO Port Sudan '' .
Agrimpex on behalf of Huyton instructed its regular brokers , J. Gran & Partners Ltd. -LRB- `` JGP '' -RRB- of London , to charter a vessel to lift the wheat contracted to be shipped by Cremer .
It transpires that NBT was owned by Jens ran until February 1995 , when it was sold to Mr Gunnar Gran , a nephew of Mr Jens Gran , who until the end of 1995 worked for Messrs. Grieg , shipbrokers of Bergen .
These facts regarding NBT were unknown at any relevant time to Huyton as well as Cremer .
On the evidence of their own witness statements , neither Mr Lund nor Mr Gunnar Gran appears to have had an active conception of a broker \ 's duties of good faith and integrity .
Mr Gunnar Gran positively instructed Mr Lund to mislead Agrimpex , e.g .
At a demurrage rate of $ 11,000 a day , and allowing for holidays and other interruptions of time , Cremer \ 's liability for load port demurrage amounted to $ 496,840.97 , as set out in a calculation which was sent by Huyton to Cremer on about 18th December 1995 together with a copy of the charter between NBT and Huyton .
Cremer has never refunded the extra $ 36,666.67 to its Romanian seller or informed it of the discrepancy or , indeed , about the present claim against Huyton - the explanation which Mr Birkholz gave me being to the effect that Cremer wants to deal with everything at once , after concluding its claim against Huyton .
At about the same time Cremer \ 's shipping agent , Proline of Hamburg , sent a message to JGP , expressed to be `` on behalf of our principal ... which is presently the owner of the wheat on board of your good vsl '' and asking JGP to advise `` how the consignee will rcv the cargo , against presentation of first class bank guarantee ?? ''
On 29th December 1995 Cremer and Huyton received from Olympic notice of a claim to a lien in respect of freight and `` undisputed demurrage '' at Constantza of $ 316,468.75 due under Olympic \ 's charter with NBT .
The limited amount of demurrage claimed was of concern to Cremer , and was a factor in a developing belief that Huyton could not be trusted .
Accordingly , Cremer sought to obtain information from other sources about the actual charter position and rates , whilst telling Huyton no more than that it was checking figures or seeking documents .
In a further message to Huyton on 11th January , excusing its non-payment of demurrage , Cremer referred to the notices received from both Olympic and the vessel \ 's owners .
On 4th January 1996 , Sotisco complained to Huyton about the gluten content of the wheat , whilst acknowledging that the contract contained no express term regarding gluten , and ended : \ t `` Finally , pls be notified tht above cargo will be kept in silo at Port Sudan for your account own risk and expense till this quality dispute is finalized .
Huyton did not at this stage pass on Sotisco \ 's complaint to Cremer .
On 9th January 1996 Cremer presented shipping documents to Huyton \ 's bank , notifying Huyton that it had done so .
At 1722 hours Huyton also insisted once again that Cremer settle immediately the $ 496,840.97 claimed for loadport demurrage .
On 15th January 1996 Cremer \ 's administration department responded to Huyton \ 's message regarding demurrage : \ t `` Our legal department has indicated to us that we are indeed in no way partner to the owners and therefore herewith confirm that we will arrange remittance without any further delay .
The rest of the message , in so far as it seemed to acknowledge liability for the full sum claimed , appears now to have been incautiously expressed by Cremer \ 's administration department , since others responsible for the making and handling of this contract within Cremer were still very exercised by the unproven likelihood , as they perceived it , of a second voyage charter involving much lower loadport demurrage than that which Huyton was claiming from Cremer and a strong , though unproven suspicion that Huyton was trying to defraud Cremer .
Cremer asserted that the cargo had been `` accepted upon completion of discharge '' on 2nd January and that Huyton had thereby `` waived any right to reject the documents as presented to you on 10th January as well as to refuse to pay for the cargo received '' .
As to the documents presented , Cremer said that Huyton had also waived any discrepancies by failure to raise them within 48 hours , but that Cremer would without prejudice address them and revert in due course .
In reply on 17th January , Huyton insisted on its position and on rectification of the discrepancies before payment , saying that the rights to reject the goods and the documents were separate rights , and welcoming the fact that Cremer was addressing the discrepancies .
We have to present a fumigation certificate to our buyers in order to get paid and this is not a contract where we are obliged to accept a guarantee ... \ tOf course we will pay your documents when they conform to the contract -LRB- including our buyers being prepared to accept your non-conforming documents from us -RRB- ... '' In a message which appears effectively to have crossed with Huyton \ 's message at 1631 , Cremer at about 1622/24 on 18th January informed Huyton that as its deadline had passed without payment \ t '' ... we therefore will instruct -LSB- the bank -RSB- to immediately return the contract documents to us .
If you do this before close of business on 31st January , we will pay your invoice less the loadport demurrage -LRB- the amount of which we think you have actually agreed -RRB- and the costs we have incurred in establishing a guarantee for delivery of the goods without having the documents ... '' Cremer on 25th January supplied Huyton with a revised radiation certificate conforming with the contract terms .
In reply Huyton said that it was obvious that Cremer had taken legal advice , and set out the substance of legal advice which it said that it had taken supporting its position .
In response to Cremer \ 's message of 30th , Huyton on 31st said that it had no contract with Olympic .
It pointed out also that Olympic had only referred to the `` undisputed '' demurrage owed by NBT and ended by saying that Cremer had on 15th January accepted and said that it would meet Huyton \ 's demurrage claim .
By 31st January Cremer had supplied Huyton \ 's bank with a revised certificate of origin meeting the contract terms as well as a fumigation certificate .
Huyton still had some reservations about the documents being presented , but appears to have been prepared to waive any of its remaining objections even if valid , provided at least that Cremer agreed its other terms .
Cremer on 1st February denied that it had on 15th January agreed to meet Huyton \ 's full demurrage claim .
On 6th February Cremer said that it found Huyton \ 's attitude `` completely unreasonable '' , and that the simple facts were that \ t `` you have obtained delivery of the contract goods and you are refusing to pay the full contract price .
Huyton rejected Cremer \ 's stance and indicated that it would if necessary commence the present action to restrain pursuit of any such arbitration .
At one point , Huyton appeared to be trying to expand its scope to obtain a finding that the demurrage and guarantee charges were in fact due from Cremer to Huyton - a finding that if made would have effectively superseded the issue whether Cremer was entitled to pursue a claim in arbitration with regard to their deduction .
The true analysis is that Cremer must be regarded as having received payment of the price in full on first presentation of documents and as having accepted and satisfied in full a liability for the full amount of the demurrage and guarantee charges which Huyton claimed .
The unpleaded suggestion , made it seems for the first time in Mr Schaff \ 's skeleton , that Cremer could claim damages for breach or repudiation by Huyton in failing or refusing to pay the price prior to and on 23rd January 1996 is also unsustainable in circumstances where Cremer agreed to treat the presentation on 6th February as the first proper presentation .
But , before me , Mr Schaff did not suggest that the relief claimed by Huyton would be inappropriate or that the matter would still have to be left to the arbitrators , if I were to conclude that there was an agreement binding on and enforceable against Cremer , whereby Cremer agreed irrevocably to withdraw the demands which it presently wishes to pursue in arbitration against Huyton .
Mr Schaff raises a question mark over Huyton \ 's good faith in statements made that the goods were at Cremer \ 's disposal - particularly Huyton \ 's statement on 26th January 1996 that the goods removed from Port Sudan had been returned there , and Huyton \ 's reiteration on 2nd February 1996 that , if no agreement was reached , the goods `` will be at your disposal '' .
It is evident , from the inaccurate information provided both to Huyton by Sotisco on 4th January and to Cremer by its local contact on 30th January 1996 , that reliable information may be difficult to come by from the Sudan , and Sotisco at least may have its own motives for not keeping Huyton accurately informed .
Although it is true that Mr Philippas was vague about the precise sources of his information , and although the return of goods to Port Sudan from the interior would appear to have involved a substantial exercise , I am unable to conclude on the material before me that Mr Philippas was not repeating what he had been told and believed or that he was seeking deliberately to mislead Cremer , when he said on 26th January that the goods removed had been returned to Port Sudan and when he indicated on other occasions that the goods could and would , if necessary , be held at Cremer \ 's disposal .
This conclusion appears to me consistent also with the reasoning in Maskell v. Horner -LSB- 1915 -RSB- 3 K.B .
106 -LRB- see below -RRB- and with the treatment of the present problem in Goff and Jones on Restitution -LRB- Fourth Ed .
in Maskell v. Horner at p. 118 as being a payment -LRB- or concession -RRB- made `` voluntarily to close the transaction '' , rather than `` under compulsion of urgent and compelling necessity '' .
Mr Schaff \ 's primary contention is that Huyton broke or threatened to break the contract with Cremer by refusing to pay the price .
Cremer \ 's pleaded case is that Huyton accepted the goods and incurred liability for the price as a result of -LRB- i -RRB- the delivery of the goods ex-ship , -LRB- ii -RRB- Huyton \ 's communication to Cremer of a quality and condition claim on 12th January based upon alleged liability to its sub-buyers and -LRB- iii -RRB- the removal of part of the goods to the interior .
If that is wrong , he submits that Huyton was obliged to pay the price against presentation of the shipping documents and wrongfully failed to do so ; it thus became liable to Cremer , not strictly for the price , but for damages measured by reference to the contractual price under s. 50 .
Further alternatives which Mr Schaff sought to develop before me were that Huyton incurred , but refused to acknowledge , a liability , which was in economic terms the equivalent of the price , either in restitution or in damages on account of its retention and/or failure to return the goods to Cremer .
Taking first the contention that property passed , Mr Schaff accepts that the contract between Cremer and Huyton started lift as a contract providing for payment cash against documents .
Mr Schaff submits however that the effect of what actually occurred was to pass property either on delivery of the wheat ex ship , or , alternatively , on or about 15th January 1996 when Cremer asserted that the cargo had been `` accepted upon completion of discharge '' on 2nd January and that Huyton had thereby `` waived any right to reject the documents as presented to you on 10th January as well as to refuse to pay for the cargo received '' , and set a time limit for payment .
This is particularly so , having regard to the provision in Cremer \ 's contract with Huyton whereby shipped weight , quality , condition , description , sampling and analysis were to be final as certified on loading .
The most that can be said is that Cremer ascertained , through enquiry of JGP , that an arrangement for discharge and delivery was being made between the `` receivers '' and the vessel , that Cremer would or could have deduced from clause 45 of the charter -LRB- to which Cremer was not party -RRB- that Huyton would be providing -LRB- as it did -RRB- a letter of indemnity for this purpose , and that Cremer did not protest or react .
Cremer was not , therefore , itself party to any arrangement made with the owners of the Mike K for discharge and delivery without production of the bill of lading at Port Sudan , still less to any variation of the provision for payment CAD in its contract with Huyton .
Cremer was not aware that any wheat would be removed from Port Sudan , and Mr Carroux \ 's evidence , for what it may be worth on such a point , was that Cremer would have expected the wheat to be retained in Port Sudan for Cremer \ 's account .
Mr Philippas \ 's evidence was that Huyton was not aware that any cargo had been removed from Port Sudan , until the latter half of January 1996 -LRB- as far as he could recall not until Cremer informed Huyton on 25th January 1996 of its information to this effect , whereupon Huyton then checked with its own sources and was informed , albeit erroneously , that the goods had in fact been returned to the port -RRB- .
Mr Birkholz did not insist on payment immediately after discharge , because he knew that Cremer had still to tender shipping documents .
I would add , though not essential to my conclusion , that it was also , I think , foreseeable that Huyton would be on-selling on documentary terms , and that the presentation of shipping documents might continue to be of importance to Huyton for this reason , even though Cremer does not appear to have had particular knowledge that Huyton would require them under a letter of credit which Sotisco was in fact required to open .
That , as it happens , corresponds with the way in which Cremer evidently saw the matter until Huyton began to point out deficiencies in the documents .
It also corresponds with that aspect of Mr Schaff \ 's submissions , which rightly acknowledged the existence of a continuing contractual obligation on the part of Cremer -LRB- despite the delivery of the goods and other circumstances upon which Mr Schaff relied as making Huyton liable to pay the price -RRB- to present conforming documents to Huyton at some later stage .
But the recognition of such an obligation itself indicates that the contractually agreed documentation can not be regarded as being for the unilateral benefit of Cremer , and the suggestion that Huyton had to pay for the goods without receiving the documents , leaving it with an unsecured claim for damages if the documents subsequently proved not to match the contractual requirements , does not strike me as probable .
Mr Males sought to turn this improbability to Huyton \ 's advantage in a different way , by contending that the passing of property was irrelevant , and of no assistance to Cremer in any event , because it should be regarded as only passing contingently on proper contractual documentation being subsequently presented , so that , if and when Huyton later validly terminated the contract for failure or refusal to present such documentation , the rejection would revest property and remove any right to the price .
That case can not be sustained in relation to the period up to 19th and 23rd January 1996 , the dates on which first Huyton and then Cremer purported to treat the sale contract as at an end .
On the contrary , Cremer was insisting that it did not have to present conforming documents and that Huyton was obliged to pay the full price without conforming documents .
Mr Schaff contends that Cremer \ 's attitude in the exchanges which led to Huyton \ 's claim to treat Cremer as in repudiation was not repudiatory .
Cremer was purporting to set Huyton a deadline , failing compliance with which Cremer indicated that it would obtain return of the documents from its bank .
The matter must be viewed objectively and Mr Philippas \ 's answer in cross-examination that Huyton thought from Cremer \ 's message of 18th January 1996 that Cremer wanted the documents back on 18th January 1996 in order to correct and represent them to Huyton seems to me both unlikely to reflect accurately what Huyton understood at the time , and in any event to be irrelevant on the question what Cremer indicated objectively .
Cremer was categorically denying Huyton \ 's entitlement to such documents , and was itself laying down deadlines for a quite different character of performance to any agreed between the parties .
In my judgment , Huyton was entitled to treat Cremer \ 's attitude as repudiatory .
Mr Schaff submits that , if that was so , Huyton was obliged to restore to Cremer the goods of which it had received delivery through its sub-buyers , and that , since Huyton did not do so , its purported acceptance of Cremer \ 's repudiation was ineffective , and it was liable for the price of the goods received either as a matter of contract or on a quantum meruit .
Once Huyton had determined the contract , it was its duty to hold and , so far as necessary , make the goods available for Cremer .
I accept that this would involve making them available at Port Sudan so far as they had been removed from Port Sudan by Huyton \ 's sub-buyers .
Mr Schaff points out that Huyton did not mention the goods in its message of termination on 19th January or until its further message of 25th January , sent after Cremer \ 's response of 23rd January which referred yet again to the delivery of the goods to Huyton .
What Huyton had to make clear was that it was treating Cremer as in repudiation , and , if it did this , the automatic effect in law was to oblige Huyton to put the goods of which it had received delivery at Cremer \ 's disposal at Port Sudan , whether or not Huyton expressly adverted to that effect in its termination notice .
Further , once Cremer made a further reference to the delivery of the goods in its reply on 23rd January , Huyton did on 25th January confirm that the goods were at Cremer \ 's disposal .
In the meantime , Huyton had no duty to take any positive steps such as re-shipping them , and Cremer itself did not request Huyton for information or assistance with a view to their recovery , or take any steps in that direction , except for enquiries as the goods \ ' whereabouts made through local agents and except in so far as recovery of the goods may have been part of the thinking behind Cremer \ 's request to the bank to return the shipping documents .
Recovery of the goods must in fact always have appeared to Cremer to be a most unattractive option , whether or not they were at Port Sudan .
Further , as a matter of fact , the evidence does not satisfy me that the goods could not and would not have been held at Cremer \ 's disposal , and so far as necessary returned to Port Sudan for this purpose , had Cremer so insisted and had the parties not reached the arrangement which they did on 6th/7th February 1996 .
The probability is in my view that Mr Philippas of Huyton meant and believed what he said when he indicated on 25th January 1996 and subsequently that the goods were at Cremer \ 's disposal , although Huyton \ 's message of 25th January suggests that he also hoped that it would be possible to persuade Cremer to reach an accommodation .
In answers to interrogatories sworn unsatisfactorily by an employee of Huyton in Switzerland , who appears to have had no direct knowledge of affairs and who Mr Philippas said had not contacted him about the answers , it was stated categorically that Huyton had not given notice to Sotisco that the goods should not be used .
If Huyton \ 's stance in purporting to terminate for breach by Cremer was unjustified , then Cremer \ 's termination was on its face valid , and , since the property had not passed , entitled Cremer to recover possession of the goods .
Had Cremer shown that Huyton could not return the goods , Cremer could no doubt have acquired a restitutionary right or a right in damages ; the measure of recovery might then have related to the value of the goods in the Sudan rather than the contract price , although there is in fact no evidence which would enable any positive conclusion as to what , if any , difference , might exist between these two .
The result is that Cremer had no continuing right after 19th or alternatively 23rd January 1996 either to present conforming documents and to claim payment of the price or , if it be material , to require payment of the price or any equivalent sum by Huyton on any other basis .
One is left with an agreement made because Cremer found itself faced with a situation where it was unattractive to seek to recover the goods in the Sudan , and to dispose of them there or elsewhere .
In the absence of any illegitimate pressure from Huyton to make that arrangement , there is no basis for avoiding the arrangement , and Huyton is entitled to relief preventing Cremer from pursuing an arbitration in breach of it .
There are at least two possibilities , arising , as I have already indicated , from Cremer \ 's case as to the effect of the discharge and delivery of the goods to Huyton \ 's sub-buyers , the removal of goods from the port and/or Cremer \ 's decision to treat the goods as belonging to Huyton and to treat the price as due prior to presentation of the shipping documents .
On either basis , Huyton \ 's purported acceptance on 19th January 1996 of a repudiation by Cremer was ineffectual , but Huyton was thereby itself in repudiation which Cremer accepted on 23rd January .
On the latter scenario , since property never passed , Cremer \ 's acceptance of Huyton \ 's repudiation left Cremer with the property in the goods , but also with a claim against Huyton to make good any difference between the value of the goods realisable after their recovery in the Sudan and the contract price .
Cremer \ 's case that Huyton applied illegitimate pressure inducing Cremer to make the agreement of 6th/7th February is based expressly on the former scenario .
But Mr Schaff \ 's submissions also embraced the latter scenario , on the footing , in effect , that Huyton could , upon that scenario , be regarded as applying illegitimate pressure , by its assertion that it was Cremer who was in breach and by its disclaimer of any responsibility for the contract price at any stage , whether as such or , after Cremer \ 's acceptance of Huyton \ 's repudiation , as a measure of liability for wrongful refusal to accept and pay for the goods .
Leaving aside for the moment questions of onus , it must at least be the case that Huyton applied illegitimate pressure and that such pressure was a significant cause inducing Cremer to make the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996 .
Mr Schaff submits that , if Huyton \ 's position could now be seen to have been unjustified , it must follow that Huyton applied illegitimate pressure on Cremer -LRB- in which case , he submits , the only remaining issue would be causative inducement -RRB- .
This is contrasted in Goff and Jones on The Law of Restitution -LRB- 4th ed .
The relevant authority in the latter context is Barton v. Armstrong -LSB- 1976 -RSB- AC 104 -LRB- P.C. .
The majority referred at p. 118H to the principle that `` Once make out that there has been anything like deception , and no contract resting in any degree on that foundation can stand '' , and said at p. 119A : \ t `` Their Lordships think that the same rule should apply in cases of duress and that if Armstrong \ 's threats were `` a '' reason for Barton \ 's executing the deed he is entitled to relief even though he might well have entered into the contract if Armstrong had uttered no threats to induce him to do so .
After reviewing the facts , the majority then said at p. 120 : \ t `` If Barton had to establish that he would not have made the agreement but for Armstrong \ 's threats , then their Lordships would not dissent from the view that he had not made out his case .
On the contrary it was for Armstrong to establish , if he could , that the threats which he was making and the unlawful pressure which he was exerting for the purpose of inducing Barton to sign the agreement and which Barton knew were being made and exerted for this purpose in fact contributed nothing to Barton \ 's decision to sign .
that though it may be that Barton would have executed the documents even if Armstrong had made no threats and exerted no unlawful pressure to do so , the threats and unlawful pressure in fact contributed to his decision to sign the documents and to recommend their execution by Landmark and the other parties to them .
Professor Birks in An Introduction to the Law of Restitution -LRB- 1985 -RRB- , pp.182-3 has suggested that , in cases such as Pao On v. Lau Yiu -LSB- 1980 -RSB- AC 614 where relief was refused on the ground that there had been `` commercial pressure but no coercion '' -LRB- p. 635 -RRB- , the court was , in effect , insisting `` on a more severe test of the degree of compulsion than is found in Barton v. Armstrong '' , securing what he describes as `` a concealed discretion to distinguish between reasonable and unreasonable , legitimate and illegitimate applications of this species of independently unlawful pressure '' .
The approach there adopted by McHugh J.A. , at p. 45 , was based on statements by the House of Lords in DPP v. Lynch -LSB- 1975 -RSB- AC 653 , to the effect that , in cases of duress , `` the will -LSB- is -RSB- deflected , not destroyed '' .
in Crescendo assumed that it would be reversed in accordance with the principle applied by the Privy Council in Barton v. Armstrong .
Leaving aside cases of fraud and fraudulent misrepresentation , mentioned in Barton v. Armstrong , the law normally treats the party seeking relief in respect of a breach of contract or seeking to set aside a bargain on grounds , such as innocent misrepresentation , as under a legal onus to prove his case on causation .
Turning now to the facts of the present case , the evidence called by Cremer , from Mr Birkholz in particular , was that Cremer felt under extreme and increasing pressure during the period leading up to the agreement of 6th/7th February .
It suspected , according to Mr Birkholz \ 's witness statement and evidence , that the Huyton/NBT document was not a genuine charter , that it had been brought into existence for the purpose of brining a demurrage claim against Cremer at a higher rate , and that Huyton was trying to defraud Cremer .
-LRB- b -RRB- \ tMr Birkholz was concerned at the quality claim which Huyton raised on 12th January , and his `` distrust was confirmed '' when three days later Huyton raised an issue of discrepancies of documents .
-LRB- c -RRB- \ tCremer -LRB- rightly -RRB- did not believe the information relayed to it -LRB- innocently -RRB- by Huyton on 25th January to the effect that the part of the cargo removed inland had been returned to Port Sudan .
In these circumstances , Cremer did not believe that Huyton was holding or capable of holding the goods at its disposal , as Huyton said on and after 25th January that it was doing ; and therefore distrusted Huyton on this basis too .
-LRB- d -RRB- \ tAfter the dispute arose whether Huyton was bound to pay without Cremer presenting conforming documents , and both parties claimed to have terminated the contract , Cremer found itself in a situation where the goods were in the Sudan , and it had a choice between -LRB- i -RRB- continuing to pursue a claim to the price , if necessary by arbitration , or -LRB- ii -RRB- accepting Huyton \ 's stance and reclaiming the goods or -LRB- iii -RRB- reaching some compromise .
-LRB- e -RRB- \ tMr Birkholz said that in this situation he became very scared ; it was `` alarming '' to have Huyton as a buyer ; his witness statement described Huyton as a `` front '' for Agrimpex , and suggested that , at the start of negotiations , Cremer had thought it would be dealing with Agrimpex , but was happy to proceed with Huyton because Huyton was related to Agrimpex .
What Mr Amaslidis learned from Mr Jens Gran revealed that one of JGP \ 's employees , Mr Lund , had broken Agrimpex \ 's policy regarding voyage charters .
Agrimpex and Huyton remained ignorant of the much more serious breaches of duty , which can now be seen to have taken placed between Mr Lund and Mr Gunnar Gran , directed against Huyton \ 's interests , as well as ignorant of the family relationship between JGP and NBT -LRB- which itself would no doubt have raised questions -RRB- .
In parenthesis , it now also seems clear , from the facts recounted at the beginning of this judgment and from JGP \ 's documents obtained under subpoena by Cremer , that Mr Lund and Mr Gunnar Gran -LRB- and I have to say that it seems from his signature of certain false addenda , although he did not give evidence before me , quite likely also Mr Jens Gran -RRB- would have gone to considerable lengths to put Huyton off the scent , had Huyton sought to investigate further , so that it is unclear that any further attempts to obtain the head voyage charter or to investigate further would at that stage have led anywhere .
The limited demurrage for which Olympic claimed a lien on 29th December 1995 was also not a matter on which Mr Amaslidis focused , or indeed , a matter which Cremer - co-addressee of Olympic \ 's notice - raised with Huyton for another month .
On 30th January and 1st February 1996 , Cremer did for the first time disclose concerns about the demurrage in the form of an assertion - not based on more than suspicion , and not in fact correct - that Huyton was party to a charter at lower rates than those claimed from Cremer .
Viewing the matter on the basis that Huyton knew that Mr Lund had breached Huyton \ 's internal policy but were as much deceived as anyone about JGP \ 's and NBT \ 's wider misconduct and deception , I do not think that Mr Schaff \ 's criticism of Huyton \ 's conduct , as objectively unreasonable , can be sustained .
It would not be right , in my view , to treat Huyton as in effect responsible for Cremer \ 's suspicion either arising or persisting .
Cremer \ 's final concerns , when Huyton passed on a quality claim and then raised the question of discrepancies , do not seem to me to have been objectively based on anything that Huyton actually did or said .
Cremer evidently viewed Huyton as misleading it about the location of the part of the goods originally moved .
If Huyton was being dishonest about what was happening to the goods , the risk that Huyton intended that Cremer should get neither the price nor the goods must have seemed very large .
In fact , however , Huyton was not being dishonest , and I am not satisfied that the goods could not and would not have been returned to Cremer \ 's custody , at Port Sudan , had Cremer really ever wanted this .
As to -LRB- c -RRB- , the views expressed in Mr Birkholz \ 's witness statement about Huyton \ 's position as a `` front '' were not justified in evidence , but they may again have represented the sort of thinking to which Cremer fell prey at the time , although it was , so far as appears , unjustified .
Taking next -LRB- e -RRB- , Cremer \ 's fears about Huyton \ 's status , financial and otherwise , appear to have developed ex post facto , after the dispute arose .
This contract was in fact made against a background of previous contracts which Huyton -LRB- as distinct , it appears , in one case from Cremer -RRB- had performed entirely satisfactorily , even though none had been as large as this .
Cremer was , I find , perfectly happy at the outset of the present contract to deal with Huyton .
The reality , in my judgment , is that Cremer would not have wished to have the goods back in the Sudan in any event , if it could avoid that .
Mr Schaff said that this was a situation where illegitimate pressure by Huyton , in the form of a threat not to pay the price even though it or its equivalent was due , left Cremer with no option but to accept Huyton \ 's terms .
Mr Birkholz said that Cremer was confident in its position that the price was due .
It is not suggested that Cremer faced any overwhelming or unduly onerous financial burden having to carry the $ 5 million until it succeeded in arbitration , assuming that Huyton could and would then have paid any such sum which Cremer was awarded .
But that concern was , it seems to me , substantially generated by matters for which Huyton had no responsibility , and which lay outside any refusal by Huyton to make such payment - such as Cremer \ 's perception that Huyton was an untrustworthy front , based in turn on Cremer \ 's belief that Huyton was deceiving it about demurrage and the whereabouts of the goods .
This thinking too is not borne out by the actual facts , as they are now known , and , once again , it was Cremer \ 's mistaken perception of what Huyton was doing , rather than the actual or threatened breach by non-payment itself , which in this situation , in my judgment , played the most powerful role in Cremer \ 's decision to accept the compromise .
Further , it was a claim in relation to which Huyton had some reason to look askance at Cremer \ 's attitude , particularly in the light of Cremer \ 's apparent concession on 15th January that it would pay the demurrage in full ; as I have indicated , that message was in fact probably an ill-phrased message prepared by Cremer \ 's administration department with nothing more than the lien claims in mind , but Huyton had at the time no reason to know this .
Only on 30th January did Cremer raise any explicit query about demurrage , and on 1st February Cremer sought to support this by asserting that it had , subsequently to 15th January , itself received information that Huyton was charging Cremer an amount more than Huyton had actually had to pay under its own charterparty .
As far as Huyton was concerned this was simply untrue -LRB- and in fact , although Huyton did not actually know this , it was not even true that Cremer had received information to that effect -RRB- .
It seems to me that , against this background , it is understandable that Huyton should decide that it was not prepared to have anything more to do with the matter , if Cremer was going to pursue its points on demurrage and charges .
Huyton was giving up an arguable case that the goods were now Cremer \ 's responsibility , and it seems to me that it was entitled , before so doing , to look at this other contractual dispute , raised with it late in the day , and to insist on its final resolution as part of an overall arrangement .
I come back to the question whether , assuming that Huyton did commit an actual and threatened breach of contract in refusing to pay the price , the agreement which was reached on 6th/7th February 1996 was induced , or Cremer \ 's will was deflected , in any significant way by such breach - as opposed , for example , to Cremer \ 's own perception of the merits and demerits of alternative courses open to it , influenced to a major extent by Cremer \ 's mistaken perceptions about Huyton \ 's conduct and intentions .
I note that in Barton , in addition to a number of incidents when Armstrong was undoubtedly responsible for threats to Barton \ 's life and safety , there was an incident in which a man called Vojinovic informed Barton that he had been hired by Armstrong to kill Barton , with which the majority in the Privy Council dealt as follows : \ t `` It is true that the judge was not satisfied that Vojinovic had been employed by Armstrong but if one man threatens another with unpleasant consequences if he does not act in a particular way , he must taken the risk that the impact of his threats may be accentuated by extraneous circumstances for which he is not in fact responsible .
That statement was however related to extraneous circumstances , for which Barton had no more responsibility than Armstrong .
I think that a court should take that into account , and in effect put such misconceptions aside , when considering the sufficiency and significance of any causal link between any illegitimate pressure applied by Huyton and Cremer \ 's reaction .
Even assuming that a conclusion that Huyton was in breach or threatened breach of contract imposes on Huyton an initial factual onus to show that Cremer was not thereby caused to enter into the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996 , it seems to me that , once Cremer \ 's misconceptions are taken into account , the onus shifts to Cremer to show that it would still have entered into that agreement , aside from such misconceptions , simply on the basis of Huyton \ 's breach or threatened breach of contract .
But an important reason for Cremer \ 's strength of feeling and for its actual decision to accede to Huyton \ 's demands was Cremer \ 's -LRB- erroneous -RRB- perception that Huyton was acting in bad faith towards it .
It seems to me that Cremer would in likelihood have acted in one or other of the following two ways : -LRB- i -RRB- Either Cremer would simply have stuck to its stated position , refusing to enter any such agreement as that of 6th/7th February 1996 , and would have pursued Huyton in arbitration for the price or damages measured by reference to the price , unless Huyton took a less rigid line .
On this basis , it was not any illegitimate pressure applied by Huyton , but Cremer \ 's misconceptions , which led to the agreement now challenged .
-LRB- ii -RRB- Alternatively , if one assumes that Cremer would still have made the agreement which it did , it would have done so not because the course identified in -LRB- i -RRB- would not have been practical if Cremer could have been assured of its success , but because -LRB- a -RRB- Cremer would have had well in mind , in relation to an unusual and complex dispute , that it could be wrong and that , if this proved to be so , its position in respect of the goods and the market might by then really be prejudiced , and/or because -LRB- b -RRB- at the end of the day Cremer was neither commercially nor financially greatly affected either way by the deduction on account of demurrage and guarantee expenses on which Huyton was insisting .
On this hypothesis , although Cremer would not have entered into the agreement but for Huyton \ 's actual or threatened breach of contract , it could not , in my judgment , show that the pressure applied by Huyton deflected its will or constituted a sufficiently significant cause of the agreement for it to be unconscionable for Huyton to rely on the agreement .
In the result Cremer \ 's defences to this action fail on the basis that -LRB- a -RRB- by the agreement dated 6th/7th February 1996 Cremer agreed irrevocably to withdraw the demands which it now seeks to pursue in arbitration against Huyton and -LRB- b -RRB- this agreement binds Cremer .
It binds Cremer , because there was no illegitimate pressure , since Huyton never owed the price or its equivalent .
But , for the reasons I have given , even if there had been illegitimate pressure , Cremer \ 's case on economic duress should still , I believe , have failed , on the ground that there was no sufficient deflection of will or no sufficiently significant causal link - between such pressure and the agreement - to make it unconscionable for Huyton to insist on the agreement .
Dubal alleges that he gave no consideration and that the money was paid by a company then called Marc Rich & Co AG -LRB- `` Richco '' -RRB- as part of a dishonest scheme hatched , inter alios , by Dubal \ 's chief executive , Mr. Ian Livingstone , under which Richco pre-bought Dubal \ 's aluminium at a discounted price and in return provided finance in a very large sum for the construction of a fourth potline , all on what are said to be disadvantageous terms to Dubal .
\ t \ tThe background to these claims , at any rate so far as they involve other parties such as Mr. Livingstone and Richco and their participation in the Richco Consultancy Agreement , may be found in Dubai Aluminium Company Limited v Salam -LRB- unreported , 17 July 1998 -RRB- .
\ tThis doctrine , or exception to the general rule of legal professional privilege , is exemplified in a number of decisions such as R v Cox -LRB- 1884 -RRB- 14 QBD 153 , Williams v Quebrada Railway Land & Copper Co -LSB- 1895 -RSB- 2 Ch 751 , and more recently in Barclays Bank PLC v Eustace -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 WLR 1238 .
\ t \ tIn R v Cox at 167 , Stephen J said referring Lord Bougham \ 's judgment in Greenough v Gaskell 1 My & K 98 , that \ t \ t `` The reason on which the rule -LSB- of privilege -RSB- is said to rest can not include the case of communications , criminal in themselves , or intended to further any criminal purpose for the protection of such communications can not be possible otherwise than injurious to the interests of justice and to those of the administration of justice .
It would seem that the concept of iniquity covers `` crime or fraud '' -LRB- R v Cox at 165 -RRB- , the `` criminal or unlawful '' -LRB- Bullivant v A-G for Victoria -LSB- 1901 -RSB- AC 196 at 201 -RRB- and `` all forms of fraud and dishonesty such as fraudulent breach of trust , fraudulent conspiracy , trickery and sham contrivances '' -LRB- Crescent Farm -LRB- Sidcup -RRB- Sports Limited v Sterling Offices Limited -LSB- 1972 -RSB- 2 Ch 553 at 565 : see Barclays Bank v Eustace at 1249CD per Schiemann LJ -RRB- .
\ t \ tThe matters complained of in the present case , based upon Dubal \ 's own evidence , and the very detailed information there found about Mr. Al Alawi \ 's bank , credit card and telephone accounts , including the admission made by Dubal \ 's solicitor , Mr. Cranston , in his third affidavit , that information in relation to certain of Mr. Al Alawi \ 's accounts had been obtained by a sub-agent instructed by Page Associates making what Mr .
It is submitted that such information was by its nature confidential , and that access to it was unauthorised ; that other than the reference to such pretext calls , no explanation had been provided as to how it had been provided as to how it had been obtained , and that in the circumstances very strong inferences were to be drawn that the information had been obtained by means of false representation and impersonation , and that criminal offences had been committed , either in England under the Data Protection Act 1984 or in Switzerland under the banking secrecy laws there in force .
Indeed , Mr. Pelling , who appears for Dubal , has not been concerned to answer Mr. Al Alawi \ 's complaints on the facts , but rather has taken a stand in principle to which I will refer below .
In the circumstances , while I do not think that Mr. Pelling accepts the strictures made , and I am certainly in no position to find exactly what has been done or whether Dubal \ 's solicitors or Page Associates themselves had foreknowledge of such matters , nevertheless I believe that I can find there to be a strong prima facie case of criminal or fraudulent conduct in the obtaining of such information concerning Mr. Al Alawi \ 's accounts , and indeed in the light of Mr. Pelling \ 's approach to his submissions I think I can proceed for present purposes on the assumption that such conduct has occurred .
\ t \ tFor the purposes of his second submission , Mr. Pelling cited the well-known case of Karuma v R -LSB- 1955 -RSB- AC 197 .
In this connection the extracts that I have cited above from R v Cox at 167 appear to me to lend support to my conclusion .
These included several persons based in Latvia , but also several based in London , including solicitors who were partners or employees of Watson Farley & Williams -LRB- `` WFW '' -RRB- , persons who were officers or employees of Latmar Services Ltd. -LRB- `` Latservices '' -RRB- , an English company with offices in London , and a Mr. Henriksen , a Norwegian ship broker operating through a Bermuda service company but with offices in England -LRB- as well as himself having a home here -RRB- .
It has a bank account with Hambros Bank in London which it opened in connection with the contracts .
On 8 September WFW faxed to Ms Potts of Capco a letter asking her to see to the passing of board resolutions in terms sent to her , and the execution of a power of attorney also in terms supplied .
The evidence includes a statement by Ms Potts , apparently prepared in connection with related proceedings in France , which explains in some detail how the company was set up and operated , demonstrating the care that was taken to ensure that decisions on the part of Latreefers were taken either by the board or by someone duly authorised by the board , so as to emphasise the independent corporate personality of Latreefers .
Mr. Lax , of Latreefers \ ' solicitors Lawrence Graham , says that it had been intended that the money needed to pay the instalments would come from a loan by a German bank , Hamburgischer Landesbank , and that in the meantime funds would be provided from elsewhere in the group .
359 of 1987 -RRB- -LSB- 1988 -RSB- Ch 210 -LRB- also know , less enigmatically , as International Westminster Bank plc v. Okeanos Maritime Corporation , and to which I will refer as the Okeanos case -RRB- the statement of the relevant principles has evolved to the point at which they were summarised , most recently , by Knox J in Re Real Estate Development Co -LSB- 1991 -RSB- BCLC 210 , at 217 , as consisting of three core requirements , as follows : \ r \ n -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThere must be a sufficient connection with England and Wales which may , but does not necessarily have to , consist of assets within the jurisdiction .
\ r \ n Sufficient connection with England and Wales Mr. Moss Q.C .
If there is a clear and substantial connection with some other jurisdiction , it may be that more is needed by way of a connection with England and Wales for it to suffice as the foundation of the exercise of extra-territorial jurisdiction .
However , in the present case , Mr. Moss submits that connections with other jurisdictions are no more substantial , and certainly the connection with the country of incorporation , Liberia , which on first principles might have the best claim to be the jurisdiction to govern insolvency , is almost non-existent .
\ r \ n \ tHe points out that the contracts are between a Liberian buyer and a Polish shipbuilder , that much or most of the negotiation took place in Poland and Latvia , that the obligations under the contract , both of the Yard to design , build and deliver , and of Latreefers to pay , were to be performed in Poland , and that the management of the company , in terms of the operations of the board , took place in the Isle of Man .
\ r \ n \ tIn my judgment , the connecting factors with England and Wales , while not so strong as in the case before Peter Gibson J , are sufficient as a basis for assuming jurisdiction over this foreign corporation , and no other jurisdiction is more appropriate to wind up the company .
I note also that , in Bell Group Finance -LRB- Pty -RRB- Ltd. v. Bell Group Holdings Ltd -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 BCLC 304 , admittedly a case concerning an English company , but one where it was argued that there was no point in making an order since there were no available assets and no other reasonable possibility of benefit for the petitioning creditors , because any assets would be swallowed up by the secured creditors , Chadwick J used cases such as Re Compania Merabello , Re Eloc and the Okeanos case by way of analogy to justify making a winding-up order in order to allow an investigation of whether there were grounds for attacking the bank \ 's security .
I am satisfied that there is a sufficient connection with England and Wales and that the petitioning creditor should be regarded as someone who has submitted itself to the jurisdiction , for the purposes of the third core requirement .
Kirkaldy were a company whose main business was blasting and painting of vessels ; they wished to expand their business in south-west England by purchasing their own dry dock and setting it up in Portland , Dorset in competition with ship repair and maintenance companies in Southampton .
When it was scratched on 22 July 1997 by Mr. Walker of the Coffey Syndicate and Mr. Shrimpton of the Cox Syndicate it was contemplated that the vessel would be towed first to Southampton for work to be done on her and later to Portland .
In fact plans changed with the result that the vessel was towed direct from Sweden to Portland but that was only decided after 22 July 1997 .
-LSB- The part between the parenthetical dashes was added by Mr. Walker in his pen ; the rest of the clause was in type -RSB- Underwriters defence to the claim is that Mr. Peter Curtis -LRB- to give him his accurate spelling -RRB- performed neither a towage survey nor a condition survey and that the contract of insurance came to an end at latest when the vessel sailed .
I heard evidence of fact on behalf of the Plaintiffs from Mr. David Figgins , the managing director of and majority shareholder in Kirkaldy , the owning company , from two gentlemen whose services he used for the purpose of deciding whether to buy the Dry Dock , Mr. Alan Vincent and Mr. David Bailey .
Mr. Vincent was a friend and Mr. Bailey , an employee , was a marine electrical engineer and more knowledgeable than Mr. Figgins about technical matters to do with ships and docks .
I also heard from Mr. Nother who rode on the tow between Sweden and Portland and from Mr. Curtis , the surveyor nominated in the insurance contract .
For the defence , I heard from Mr. Walker and Mr. Shrimpton , and also Mr. Tate , Mr. Walker \ 's deputy on the underwriting box .
I had marine engineering expert evidence from Mr. Hart of Aquarius International Consultants for the Plaintiff and Mr. Waite of the Salvage association for the Defendants ; I also heard expert underwriting evidence from Mr. Richard Outhwaite and Mr Geoffrey Luben .
Once Mr. Figgins decided he would like his company to acquire a dry dock , he went to look at two available dry docks , one in Copenhagen and the other -LRB- the one he eventually bought -RRB- at Falkenburg near Gothenburg in Sweden .
There were some holes in the safety deck but not -LRB- through Inbro Citygate Insurance Brokers Ltd. -RRB- to procure insurance with the Royal Insurance group did not bear fruit ; he then obtained an introduction -LRB- through personnel at TSA Tugs Ltd. -RRB- to Mr. Richard Ellis of Everard Insurance Brokers Ltd. .
Mr. Ellis then telephoned Mr. Curtis and asked if he would inspect the dock to approve it for towage to England .
Mr. Ellis then faxed Mr. Curtis on 18 July 1997 in these terms : - Further to our telephone conversation on the afternoon of 16th July , I confirm that I have been instructed by Mr. David Figgins , Managing Director of J Kirkaldy & Sons , to place insurance on the above and that you are his nominated Surveyor to carry out the Underwriters required Towage Approval Survey and Condition Survey .
Mr. Curtis flew out to Falkenburg with Mr. David Bailey on 28 July and inspected the dock on 29 July and for a short while on 30 July before flying home .
Mr Curtis then began his inspection ; sometimes Mr. Bailey was with him while at other times Mr. Bailey was looking round by himself .
He then returned from Sweden to the United Kingdom on 30 July 1 997 together with Mr. Bailey .
He was satisfied that his recommendations had been complied with and he returned to the United Kingdom together with Mr. Figgins and Mr. Bailey who had both arrived in Sweden to see the tug set off with the dry dock in tow .
Mr. Curtis drew up a report of his inspection of the dry dock and dating it 11 August 1997 , sent it to Everards under cover a fax sheet of 13 August entitled `` Re Towage of Floating Dry-dock Sweden to Portland -LRB- Dorset -RRB- '' .
Mr. Walker was away on holiday but his deputy Mr. Tate read Mr. Curtis \ 's report at Mr. Pike \ 's request and , then , also at Mr. Pike \ 's request , signed the Everard \ 's fax , `` Noted and Agreed '' .
Mr. Marshall and Mr. Waite surveyed the dock at various stages between 3rd March and 22nd June on behalf of underwriters and they made various reports .
The reports of Mr. Waite and Mr. Marshall of the Salvage Association on the state of the dock at the time of the sinking were not seriously disputed .
The importance of this is that underwriters argued that these defects were present in Sweden , were not noticed or commented on by Mr. Curtis and would have been revealed if a condition survey had been carried out .
As far as the matrix of the contract is concerned , I find that both Mr. Ellis of Everard \ 's and Mr. Suckling of Swire Blanch -LRB- the Lloyd \ 's brokers -RRB- were acting on behalf of the assured in the usual way in their dealings with Mr. Walker of the Coffey Syndicate and Mr. Shrimpton of the Cox Syndicate .
He submitted that all these view were reasonable and possible , that Mr. Curtis had adopted the first construction as correct -LRB- with Owners \ ' expert Mr. Hart adopting the second and Insurers \ ' expert Mr. Waite adopting the third -RRB- , that the clause was ambiguous and that the ambiguity should be resolved against the insurer and the first possible construction was the correct one for this case .
It is true that the terms of Mr. Ellis \ 's written fax of 18th July instructed Mr. Curtis to `` carry out the Underwriters required Towage Approval Survey and Condition Survey '' .
But Mr. Curtis gave evidence that in prior telephone conversations Mr. Ellis had talked only of a Towage Approval Survey .
It is also the case that the heading of Mr. Ellis \ 's fax read : `` J. Kirkaldy & Sons - Towage of Floating Drydock From Sweden to Southampton Water '' thus giving sole emphasis to the towage aspect of the matter .
There must be a true ambiguity before one can resort to the rule ; it would be wrong to create an ambiguity in order to resort to the rule , see Cole v Accident Insurance -LRB- 1889 -RRB- 5 TLR 736 , 737 per Lindley and Bowen L.JJ .
It was also pointed out that the surveyor in Sweden could not know anything about the conditions under which the dry dock would have to operate at Portland .
Finally it was said that insurers were content to accept the risk of why the dry dock while in Sweden without a condition survey -LRB- which was only required prior to sailing and there was , therefore , no reason why the dry dock while in Sweden without a condition survey -LRB- which was only required prior to sailing -RRB- and there was , therefore , no reason why they should not be prepared to accept the risk of the dry dock while in Portland likewise without a condition survey done for that purpose but only done for the purpose of the towage .
This is not a convincing argument since the parties all thought that the dock would not be operating as a dry dock while in Sweden and would only be there for a short time -LRB- during survey and compliance with any recommendations -RRB- before sailing to England .
and Brown v G10 Insurance -LSB- 1998 -RSB- Lloyd \ 's I & R Reports 201 , 209 per Chadwick L.J .
As Lord Goff of Chieveley said in The Good Luck -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 A.C. 233 , 263A `` fulfilment of the warranty is a condition precedent to the liability of the insurer .
Mr. Reeder alleged that the towage approval survey was nevertheless defective because Mr. Curtis failed to do any testing for strength which was an essential part of a proper towage approval survey .
On this I had the expert evidence of Mr. Hart for the Owners and Mr. Waite of the Salvage Association for the insurers .
Mr. Curtis did consider the wave strengths likely to be encountered in an August crossing of the North Sea but did not do any theoretical calculations .
Mr. Reeder also submitted that Mr. Curtis never did a survey which would establish that the dry dock had sufficient strength in fact , because he did not enter a sufficient number of tanks and inspect in each tank .
If , therefore , Mr. Reeder \ 's test were the right test in law I would conclude in this case that , in the light of Mr. Curtis \ 's ability to enter and examine only the port side wing tanks , stress calculations were essential and that a failure to do such calculations was a failure to do an essential part of a towage approval survey .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Waiver/Estoppel Mr. Teare submitted that if no condition survey had been performed with the result that the contract of insurance was discharged on sailing , the contract came back into effect as a result of Mr. Tate \ 's noting and agreeing of Mr. Curtis \ 's report on 14 August while Mr. Walker was away on holiday .
As I have already indicated Mr. Walker did not know the position until about 15 December when either he or Mr. Tate telephoned Mr. Curtis and asked for a copy of the Condition Survey and Mr. Curtis said he had not done one .
The mere fact that Mr. Tate read Mr. Curtis \ 's Towage Approval Survey and wrote `` Noted & agreed '' on Everard \ 's fax beneath Everard \ 's words : - `` We attach for your records , copy of fax from surveyor re towage approval .
Of course Mr. Curtis only examined the dry dock , in any event , after the insurance contract had been concluded and Mr. Reeder accepted that he could only rely on matters shown to Mr. Figgins at the time when the contract was made .
Previously insurance had rested with Eagle Star , although various subsidiaries had been insured by a number of different companies , eg Small and Parkes had been insured by Midland Employers .
The Note read : \ t `` Referring to the letter on the file from Mr. Kaye of Davies Arnold Cooper and the enclosure referred to the matter has been discussed with Mr. Cross and it was agreed that we should retain the correspondence on the file but take no further action .
There were three further claims made in 1969 , in the names of Sibbons , Moon and Killyleagh , and the rest were made in 1971 .
Three of them involved employment within the policy period , but of only 21 months -LRB- Dalgleish -RRB- , 10 months -LRB- Horgan -RRB- and 41 months -LRB- Bolton -RRB- .
As for non-disclosure , only five claims are relevant , the Ford , Dalgleish , Sibbons , Moon and Killyleagh claims .
But of these , the Dalgleish claim was not recognised as involving mesothelioma until 1971 , which is too late for the purpose of non-disclosure ; the Ford claim was originally put as a matter of asbestosis -LSB- 1 -RSB- ; and in the case of the Sibbons , Moon and Killyleagh claims , death was ascribed to mesothelioma caused by asbestosis -LSB- 2 -RSB- .
Only three names on the list are familiar , the names of Ford and Moon -LRB- under 1969 -RRB- and Sibbons -LRB- under 1971 -RRB- .
For the present , I would observe , first , that it is not possible to say that the Ford , Moon and Sibbons cases were not treated as asbestosis cases proper , since in each case the claim referred to asbestosis as either the only cause , or as the cause of mesothelioma ; secondly , that in any event what was being considered at the meeting was for the defendants to undertake all asbestosis related risk for the purpose of the 1969 Act , at the stage without the cross-indemnity ; thirdly , the reference to `` asbestosis '' in Mr Banham \ 's memorandum is his language , but not necessarily the language of the plaintiffs ; and fourthly , that the express reference to mesothelioma in memorandum 3 -LRB- as it subsequently emerged -RRB- indicated that the defendants -LRB- who drafted that memorandum -RRB- had the distinction between pneumoconiosis and mesothelioma in mind as well as the fact that liability under the compulsory insurance being contemplated would include liability for mesothelioma .
Eagle Star was also notified that the plaintiffs were claiming in respect of `` all past cases settled by Cape '' of a like kind .
\ tOn 28 July 1982 the plaintiffs issued a writ against Eagle Star in respect of three mesothelioma cases , Mr Gray , Mrs Jefferson and Mrs Young , who had worked for the plaintiffs in 1962 , in 1951 , and from 1939 to 1941 respectively .
A manuscript response written by Mr John Robinson , the assistant general manager , reads : \ t `` No further action required now , but note `` Midland '' have denied that `` PN cover '' under their policy -LRB- or whatever -RRB- included Mesothelioma .
It is not clear why this query was raised at that time , but it may have had something to do with the fact , as it would seem , that other insurers , such as Midland and Eagle Star , were beginning to face up to the same point .
\ tBe that as it may , by letter dated 5 June 1984 Eagle Star wrote directly to Mr Robinson as follows : \ t `` For your very private information we are at present engaged in some litigation seeking to test the validity of the Asbestosis Exclusion which appeared in our policies and which in general terms followed the old tariff wording .
\ tOn 1 October 1984 Eagle Star wrote again to Mr Robinson , referring directly to the plaintiffs and saying : \ t `` You will be aware from our previous conversations that we are involved in some litigation concerning the above named company , our last policy having lapsed in 1965 .
Hand-written notes which may have been part of the same investigative exercise state : \ t `` If -LSB- Eagle Star -RSB- win it may prevent Cape from attempting to push such claims on to us .
\ tThe investigator may have been a Mr Charles Young , for in a further letter dated 24 October 1984 Eagle Star thanked Mr Robinson for a telephone call from Mr Young , and continued in a vein which suggested that the information that he had provided was useful .
\ t `` I hope you will derive some benefit from the enclosures which are passed to you for information and I note from the final paragraph of your latter dated 1st October 1984 that none of them will be used or produced without your first making a prior and proper official request ... '' \ tIn the end , the defendants did not give evidence for Eagle Star and the Eagle Star litigation with the plaintiffs was shortly thereafter compromised , as Eagle Star informed Mr Robinson on 21 November 1984 .
As Mr Palmer wrote in his skeleton argument : \ t `` It is accepted by Dr Davies -LSB- Dr Dewi Davies , the defendants \ ' expert -RSB- that mesothelioma and other conditions caused by inhalation of asbestos do not fall strictly within the accurate medical definition of pneumoconiosis , because they do not involve a fibrosis of the lung parenchyma .
\ tMr Palmer next relied on the affidavit evidence of Dr Davies to the effect that pneumoconiosis came to be used by many people for almost any kind of occupational lung disorder caused by dust ; that during the 1950s and early 1960s , as it became clear that exposure to asbestos dust caused not only the diffuse lung fibrosis known as asbestosis but also other conditions thought to be associated with asbestosis , such as lung cancer , pleural disease and mesothelioma , so all these conditions were often swept up within the asbestosis label ; that as late as 1975 , Respiratory Diseases by Crofton and Douglas referred -LRB- Table 30.1 at page 509 -RRB- to Asbestosis under the table heading of `` Commoner Pneumoconioses '' and stated the `` Pathological effects '' of asbestosis as including mesothelioma , viz - \ t `` Pulmonary fibrosis , pleural calcification , bronchial carcinoma , pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma , skin warts '' ; that as late as 1973 the Industrial Injuries Advisory Council \ 's report -LRB- at para 48 -RRB- stated that , whereas asbestosis was originally interpreted generally as meaning diffuse pulmonary fibrosis - \ t `` in recent years there has in addition been a tendency to describe as asbestosis such changes as pleural thickening and pleural plaques '' ; that in 1980 the sixth edition of The Diseases of Occupation by Hunter was still discussing lung cancer and mesothelioma within the section `` The Pneumoconioses '' ; and that in conclusion he would have no hesitation in saying that in the far less well informed and evolving industrial climate of the 1960s the expression `` pneumoconiosis '' was in general use as an all embracing term to cover industrial diseases from the inhalation of dust and was not confined to the strict medical definition to which some , but not all , doctors adhered .
\ tIn this connection Mr Palmer also relied on the definition of pneumoconiosis in the 1973 Addenda to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary -LRB- 3rd Edition , 1944 -RRB- as \ t `` any condition of the lungs that results from inhalation of dust , esp chronic fibrosis as an occupational disease of coal miners or other workers '' ; as well on the absence of any disclosure by the plaintiffs of their mesothelioma cases , or of any attempt to enforce mesothelioma claims under either their Eagle Star or their Iron Trades policies until the early 1980s , as consistent with and reinforcing his submission on construction .
\ tOn the other hand , Dr Rudd , the plaintiffs \ ' expert , while accepting that the term asbestosis may have been misused on occasions , took issue with Dr Davies on his affidavit \ 's more general or sweeping conclusions .
\ tFinally , as for Lord Hoffmann \ 's analysis in ICS v. West Bromwich , I do not think it can be readily applied to the present case .
\ tIndeed , Mr Edelman was entitled to riposte by way of reference to the Eagle Star litigation of the early 1980s : the defendants knew that there was a dispute between the plaintiffs and Eagle Star on this very issue of whether pneumoconiosis embraced mesothelioma , but they still did not seek to resolve the issue with their own insured .
This was despite the fact that the defendants recognised , in Mr Robinson \ 's letter to Eagle Star dated 12 November 1984 , that `` Unfortunately some of the documents could be dangerous '' .
It is in these circumstances that I am required to find the `` balance of justice or injustice '' -LRB- Lindsey Petroleum Co v. Hurd -LRB- 1874 -RRB- LR 5 PC 221 at 239 per Lord Selborne , Erlanger v. New Sombrero Phosphate Co -LRB- 1878 -RRB- 3 App Cas 1218 at 1279 per Lord Blackburn -RRB- upon which the issue turns .
Mr Palmer relied on the fact that in November 1971 , while preparing for the new regime in the following year , the plaintiffs included the Moon , Ford and Sibbons claims under a schedule provided to the defendants of `` Industrial Disease Claims '' handled from 1959 to 1971 .
As I have found above , the Dalgleish claim was not recognised as involving mesothelioma until 1971 , the Ford claim was originally put as a matter of asbestosis , and the Sibbons , Moon and Killyleigh deaths were clinically ascribed to mesothelioma caused by asbestosis .
On 12 November 1984 Mr Robinson wrote to Eagle Star that `` some of -LSB- Iron Trades \ ' -RSB- documents could be dangerous '' .
\ tThe defendants relied on five such claims : those of Ford , Dalgleish , Sibbons , Moon and Killyleigh .
\ tThe Ford claim , which was notified in 1968 , was the only one to have been raised early enough to affect the 1969 renewal , but on further consideration Mr Palmer accepted that there was no evidence to show that there had been any mention of mesothelioma , as distinct from asbestosis , prior to 1969 .
It is not clear why the database in the case of Moon does not reflect the terms of the post mortem findings , and this uncertainty must in turn undermine the database reference in the case of Ford to mesothelioma without further reference to asbestosis as its cause .
\ tIn sum , therefore , the defendants can rely on only two undisclosed claims , those of Ford and Moon , both of which fall to be dealt with as 1969 claims .
\ tThe Ford and Moon claims were both settled in 1969 .
The employment period in the case of Ford was between 1937 and 1957 , and in the case of Moon was between 1943 and 1961 .
The answer to that is clear : all that the defendants required , and this was as true of Small & Parkes -LSB- 5 -RSB- , with its pneumoconiosis cover , as of the other Cape companies within the policy umbrella , was a general calculation of the cost of claims paid and of an estimate for unsettled claims , as well as an estimate of the wages payroll .
Ex hypothesi , however , the non-disclosure of the Ford and Moon claims only emerged in the course of this litigation , after the 1990s claims had been met .
Mr Robert Beckman was there responding to a query raised by FLS \ 's solicitors as to the suggested nomination of a third arbitrator who had apparently worked at some time in the same US federal agency as Laker \ 's chief executive .
Mr Beckman \ 's response was to ask whether it was true that Mr Sullivan and Mr Burnton practised in the same chambers .
Laker \ 's arbitrator , who was appointed in November 1998 following a deadline imposed by IATA , resigned around 20 January 1999 after it was alleged that he and Mr Beckman had been in private correspondence with one another .
He argues that Laker is a US company , and that in the US it would be impermissible and unthinkable for two lawyers `` from the same firm '' to assume roles in the same matter where an actual or potential conflict of interest arises .
Lee & Pembertons had come off the record as its solicitors shortly before the hearing , and Laker has instructed no new solicitors to advance its application .
\ tAs a result of Mr Burnton informing the chairman of Combar , the Commercial Bar Association , of the application made against him in these proceedings , news of it came to the attention of the Vice-Chairman of the Bar of England and Wales , Mr Jonathan Hirst QC .
As it has transpired , the matter has been listed before me and I have permitted Mr George Leggatt QC , on behalf of the Bar Council , to address written and oral submissions to me : see R v. Chief Constable of the North Wales Police , ex parte AB -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR 57 at 66G , where Lord Woolf MR endorsed the validity of the conclusions of the Justice Public Law Project chaired by Laws J on `` A matter of public interest , reforming the law and practice on interventions in public interest cases '' -LRB- 1996 -RRB- .
\ tMr Sullivan has addressed me on behalf of FLS , but Laker , as I have mentioned above , was not represented .
\ tNevertheless , in the light of the important issues raised , and the fact that this court is vested with a supervisory , albeit limited , jurisdiction over arbitration and therefore in that context is concerned with the administration of justice , and in the light of the submissions I have read and heard from Mr Sullivan and Mr Leggatt , I do not think I should leave this case without expressing my views about the issue before me .
In doing so , I am very conscious that I have not had developed before me the submissions that might have been advanced in support of Laker \ 's application and in reply to the arguments of Mr Sullivan and Mr Leggatt .
As Lord Browne-Wilkinson said in Pinochet -LRB- No 2 -RRB- at 284B : `` There is no room for fine distinctions if Lord Hewart C.J. \ 's famous dictum is to be observed : it is of fundamental importance that justice should not only be done , but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done : '' see Rex v. Sussex Justices , Ex parte McCarthy -LSB- 1924 -RSB- 1 KB 256 , 259 .
Therefore , either under the rubric of apparent bias or as a fundamental principle separate from that doctrine -LRB- see Lord Browne-Wilkinson at 281D/E and 281H , Lord Goff of Chieveley at 287H , Lord Nolan at 288A , Lord Hope of Craighead at 290F/G , and see R v. Gough at 661F -RRB- the second rule is that no one must be judge in his own cause -LRB- nemo judex in sua causa -RRB- .
In this connection it is relevant to record what the Departmental Advisory Committee on Arbitration Law , chaired by Lord Justice Saville , as he then was , said in their Report in February 1996 on the Arbitration Bill -LRB- the `` DAC Report '' -RRB- at paragraphs 101/104 : \ t `` 101 .
Furthermore , the inclusion of independence would give rise to endless arguments , as it has , for example , in Sweden and the United States , where almost any connection -LRB- however remote -RRB- has been put forward to challenge the `` independence '' of an arbitrator .
\ tThe reference in paragraph 102 of that Report to Lord Justice Saville \ 's decision in the Commercial Court is a reference to Pilkington plc v. PPG Industries Inc -LRB- unreported , 1 November 1989 -RRB- .
The position is that Mr Keating is not a member of a firm : he is a recorder ; he is one of the judges of the land who has taken the judicial oath -LRB- in point of fact he is also a distinguished Queen \ 's Counsel -RRB- ; and it is to be accepted in my judgment that a recorder acting , as he was doing , as a judge of the High Court would inevitably , had he felt that there was any possible ground for conflict or any possible basis for considering that he had previously exhibited any interest in the case of any kind , have excused himself from undertaking or proceeding with the matter .
The court of appeal reasoned as follows : \ t `` Considering that the independence of an arbitrator is essential to his jurisdictional function and must be exclusively arms length , in particular , of the parties ; \ t `` Considering that the circumstances arising to challenge this independence must characterise , by the existence of physical or intellectual ties with one of the parties to the proceedings , a situation of such a nature as would affect the judgment of that arbitrator by the appearance of a definite risk of pre-disposition towards one party to the arbitration ; \ t `` Considering that the arbitrator \ 's duty to inform the parties in order that they may exercise their right of objection must be determined with regard to both the significance of the situation in question and of its impact on the arbitrator \ 's judgement ; \ t `` Considering that , in this instance , it is apparent from elements of the dispute -LRB- especially from the translation of an extract from the work `` International Commercial Litigation '' ; from the memorandum drafted by the London firm of solicitors , Masons , for the Appellant , and the statements of Mr. Anthony Scrivener , Barrister and Edward Singleton , Solicitor -RRB- that the function of a barrister is essentially carried out independently and that belonging to a set of chambers of barristers - an age old institution unique to the British system - is characterised , in essence , by the sharing of premises and support staff , without necessarily creating any professional ties , which would imply - such as in the French Law Society for example - common interests or a certain economic or intellectual dependence between various members of a set of chambers who are , between themselves , frequently called , usually because of the specialism of the chambers , to plead against each other or to participate in arbitral tribunals before which other members of the same set of chambers may appear in the capacity as counsel ; \ t `` Considering that if no other objective element existed in the current case which would have affected the independence of the President of the arbitral tribunal ; from the single fact that a member of the same set of chambers acted as counsel to one of the parties , this situation creates no tie of dependence between the arbitrator and that particular party to the arbitration proceedings ; \ t `` Considering that if it is established that the Appellant and its counsel were not aware of the fact that the President of the arbitral tribunal belonged to the same set of chambers as counsel to the Respondent , the Appellant can not have grounds against the arbitrator for not having revealed a situation which was not , in itself , of such a nature as would affect his judgment and could exist without affecting the exercise of his jurisdictional function ; \ t `` Considering that , in these circumstances , it is not established in this instance that the arbitrator referred to in the appeal had not disposed of the independent spirit necessary for the exercise of his jurisdictional power ; these being the conditions necessary to invalidate the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or to constitute an infringement of the principle of equality of the parties and respect of the rights of defence ; `` That the first two grounds are without basis .
\ tI have set out the judgment of the Paris court of appeal at some length because it represents the reasoning of a foreign court faced by evidence of the English legal scene ; because that court was required under the relevant law to consider not only the question of impartiality but also that of independence ; because the parties to that arbitration were both foreign to England ; and because the Paris court of appeal has great experience in this field since the presence in Paris of the International Chamber of Commerce -LRB- ICC -RRB- makes Paris one of the world centres of international arbitration .
\ tIt would seem that part of the material before the Paris court was a statement made by Sir Michael Kerr , who has had at bar and bench and as an arbitrator since his retirement unsurpassed experience in international arbitration .
\ tIn his statement Sir Michael Kerr also referred to an arbitration held under LCIA -LRB- London Court of International Arbitration -RRB- Rules in which the continuation as arbitrator of an English barrister was challenged on the ground that counsel in the same chambers was instructed in the case .
\ tIt is to be observed that both the Paris court of appeal and the LCIA tribunal composed of leading international arbitrators from LCIA \ 's Court of Arbitration , even while considering the challenges that arose before them from the point of view of independence as well as impartiality , concluded that no difficulty arose from the appointment of an arbitrator and the instruction of counsel in the same case who were members of the same chambers .
This may be contrasted with Mr Beckman \ 's letter to FLS \ 's solicitors dated 4 December 1998 in which Mr Beckman refers to the sharing of expenses and submits that this means that `` Mr Burnton and Mr Sullivan have a common economic interest which alone is disqualifying '' .
Were barristers partners of one another , or fellow-employees , then it may be that even `` Chinese walls '' of the most successful kind would not be enough to prevent a conflict of interest arising out of the danger that obligations of confidence would be prejudiced : see Prince Jefri Bolkiah v. KPMG -LSB- 1999 -RSB- 2 WLR 215 .
\ tI refer further to the case of Bolkiah v. KPMG because it was mentioned in correspondence by Mr Beckman .
That case concerned a firm of accountants who had undertaken work for Prince Jefri on a massive scale involving 168 KPMG personnel -LRB- see at 220B -RRB- and who now sought to act for the Government of Brunei in investigations which were contrary to the interests of Prince Jefri .
\ tIn conclusion , in considering the submissions of Mr Sullivan and Mr Leggatt I have sought to resist the temptation , to which a person , such as I , who has spent many years growing familiar with the English legal system may be prone , to assume that what is so familiar to me would be clear to foreign parties , or to overlook or underestimate concerns which such foreign parties may have .
Here , Vitol was A , Mackay Commercial Inc. -LRB- `` Mackay '' -RRB- was B , Total was C and Total was proceeding against Vitol in the shoes of Mackay , having -LRB- in broad terms -RRB- taken an assignment of Mackay \ 's rights against Vitol -LRB- `` the assignment '' -RRB- .
It subsequently transpired that Mackay did not have the funds to honour any award that Total could have obtained against it nor was Mackay in a financial position to pursue a claim against Vitol .
In these circumstances , on the 27th July , 1995 , Mackay assigned to Total its rights under the Mackay - Vitol contract , including its claims in the Mackay - Vitol arbitration -LRB- `` the assignment '' -RRB- ; a more detailed consideration of the terms of the assignment can be postponed for the moment .
The award -LRB- the subject of this appeal -RRB- was made in the Mackay - Vitol reference .
Issue -LRB- I -RRB- : As already foreshadowed , Vitol submitted that even if it was in breach of contract to Mackay and if , in turn , Mackay was in breach of contract to Total , in the words of the Reasons : '' ... a liability without payment did not constitute a loss that could found a claim for substantial damages .
First , it is to be underlined that , for the purposes of this preliminary issue only , it is to be assumed -LRB- i -RRB- that Vitol was in breach of its contractual obligations towards Mackay and -LRB- ii -RRB- that damages claimed by Mackay against Vitol in respect of Mackay \ 's liabilities under its sub-sale to Total were not irrecoverable by reason of being too remote .
In accordance with English law and procedure Total has brought a claim in arbitration against Mackay under the contract between them , and Mackay have commenced proceedings for various claims -LRB- including an indemnity for Total \ 's claim -RRB- in a separate arbitration reference against Vitol under the contract between them .
F. \ tMackay does not have the financial resources to pursue an arbitration in London against Vitol .
For these reasons and to ensure that the conduct of the arbitration is as efficient as possible , Total and Mackay have agreed that Mackay will assign to Total its claim against Vitol on the terms set out in this Agreement .
\ tIn consideration of this Assignment : - 2.1 \ tTotal shall pay to Mackay ... 7.5 % of such sums in respect of principal and interest in excess of $ 100,000 as Total ultimately may recover from Vitol in respect of the rights assigned under this Agreement ... 3.1 \ tIt is expressly agreed that this Agreement and these payments are not a compromise of Total \ 's claims against Mackay , which are to be determined in the Arbitration .
Mr. Andrew Popplewell QC , for Vitol , countered by submitting that there was a general rule of English Law that liability without payment did not constitute a recoverable loss .
As to Randall v Raper , it was not authority for the proposition that liability to third parties without prior payment founded a claim for substantial damages ; if it was a seminal case as suggested by Mr. Jacobs , it is odd that it has only been cited twice in 150 or so years ; its true ratio was instead to be found in the observations in the judgments as to the diminution in value of the goods -LRB- in other words an uncontroversial decision under what is now s. 53 of the Sale of Goods Act -RRB- indeed it is for this aspect of the decision that it has been referred to in the textbooks .
In any event , Randall v Raper could not stand with the Collinge v Heywood line of cases including The Fanti and must be regarded as no longer good law .
To all this , the response of Mr. Jacobs was that claims for indemnities were different ; that Collinge v Heywood and similar cases , including The Fanti , were all authorities on indemnities and gave no support to the existence of any general common law rule of prior payment on which Mr. Popplewell \ 's submissions depended .
On reading them , the impression which I formed was that Randall v Raper is an authority directly in point ; the argument advanced here by Vitol -LRB- liability without payment does not found a claim for substantial damages -RRB- was advanced there and rejected ; in terms of ratio and not merely dicta , Randall v Raper supports the Total case on the appeal ; by contrast , the arbitrator \ 's reasons and the Vitol case can not be reconciled with it .
It can not stand with the judgments of Lord Campbell , C.J. , Erle , J. and Crompton , J .
With regard to the citations in subsequent authority , I agree with Mr. Popplewell that the reference to Randall v Raper in Wednesbury Corporation v The Lodge Holes Colliery Company -LSB- 1907 -RSB- 1 KB 78 , at p. 92 , does not take the matter further .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tTo the contrary , Dillon , LJ -LRB- at pp .
In doing so , Dillon , LJ cited Crompton J. , in Randall v Raper with approval and concluded the relevant passage by posing the following question : `` The question here is whether the ... -LSB- APPH - RB -RSB- ... agreement leaves .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tBoth Dillon , LJ and more particularly Nicholls , LJ -LRB- as he then was -RRB- referred in favourable terms to the good sense underlying the APPH - RB agreement .
Dillon , LJ said this -LRB- at p. 92 -RRB- : `` It is the case of APPH and ... -LSB- RB -RSB- ... that the agreement achieves the sensible purpose that the claims of ... -LSB- RB -RSB- ... against ... -LSB- BC and Lloyd \ 's -RSB- ... are preserved and can be pursued for the benefit of APPH by APPH using the name of ... -LSB- RB -RSB- ... with the consent of the latter .
Nicholls , LJ concluded his judgment with the following observation -LRB- at p. 102 -RRB- : '' .
Faced with these observations , Mr. Popplewell , defending the arbitrator \ 's reasoning , was driven to submit that -LRB- i -RRB- they were obiter -LRB- ii -RRB- those of Dillon , LJ could be explained on the basis that he was or thought he was dealing with a contract of indemnity rather than a claim in damages , alternatively -LRB- iii -RRB- those of Dillon , LJ were wrong .
Secondly , I do not think that Hydrocarbons was concerned with a contract of indemnity as distinct from a claim for damages in an amount which would give the claimant an indemnity against liability ; nor , with respect to the submission , do I think that the judgment of Dillon , LJ proceeded under any such misapprehension .
Thirdly , even if it is open to me to express a view , I do not think that the observations of Dillon , LJ were wrong , still less that they were made , in effect , per incuriam in that some general rule of law to the contrary had been overlooked .
The remarks of Nicholls , LJ are readily applicable to this case .
Returning to Mr. Popplewell \ 's argument , the submission is that the House of Lords in The Fanti approved Collinge v Heywood ; loss and payment are to be equated , in the sense that payment is a condition precedent to loss ; this is a general rule of law ; Randall v Raper , which did not cite Collinge v Heywood , is inconsistent with this rule of law and can not stand ; further , outside of the field of indemnities , equity could not intervene to ameliorate the common law rule ; the arbitrator was right .
This distinction was tersely expressed by Bowen LJ , in Birmingham and District Land Company v London and North West Railway Company -LRB- 1886 -RRB- 34 Ch .
First , as to the authorities such as Post Office v Norwich Union -LSB- 1967 -RSB- 2 QB 363 and Bradley v Eagle Star -LSB- 1989 -RSB- AC 957 , categorised by Mr. Popplewell as the liability insurance cases , these were presented as examples of express contracts of indemnity ; accordingly , the conclusions to which I have already come with regard to the indemnity cases are equally applicable here .
Further , these cases suggest that liability is ascertained by judgment , award or agreement rather than needing to await payment ; if so , then , as it seems to me , it is open to Mr. Jacobs to rely on such ascertainment in the alternative to his primary case as in any event telling against the existence of any general rule of law as contended for by Vitol .
Secondly , cases relied on by Vitol dealing with contribution , such as M \ ` Gillivray v Hope -LSB- 1935 -RSB- AC 1 and Littlewood v George Wimpey & Co. Ltd. .
Unless therefore it is to be supposed that Roskill J. and those involved simply overlooked the general rule for which Vitol contends - a supposition for which there is no warrant - the assumption in Harlow & Jones that liability without payment could constitute recoverable loss must tell in favour of the Total case here .
I come next to the Giles v Thompson litigation -LSB- 1933 -RSB- 3 All ER 321 -LRB- CA -RRB- and -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 AC 142 -LRB- HL -RRB- .
31 of the Reasons -RRB- suggests that Giles v Thompson could be distinguished , I regret that it is wrong and can not be sustained .
I should perhaps add that while inclined to the view that these cases may themselves support Mr. Jacob \ 's argument as to the absence of any rule of law as contended for by Vitol , other than in respect of Randall v Raper itself , I would not wish to rest my judgment on that ground ; suffice to say that these cases show how practical justice is and can be done without any such rule of law .
Donnelly v Joyce -LSB- 1974 -RSB- 1 QB 454 -RRB- .
Additionally , it enjoys powerful support from the observations expressed by Judges of great eminence , as may be seen from a consideration of Harlow & Jones and Giles v Thompson ; likewise , it avoids an unwarranted , unnecessary and further distinction between contract and tort : the Forster v Outred line of cases .
In summary , Mr. Jacobs submitted that Vitol should have but had not sought leave to appeal ; that there was important policy reasons in the arbitration area for requiring parties to go through the `` hoops '' of obtaining leave where not in a purely defensive position ; that Vitol were not in a purely defensive position here , the champerty point being advanced only if Vitol had already succeeded on Issue -LRB- I -RRB- .
b ` Mr Justice Thomas : Introduction On 10 October 1997 Nomura International plc -LRB- Nomura -RRB- agreed to buy from Brent Walker Group plc -LRB- Brent Walker -RRB- the betting shop business of the William Hill Organisation Limited -LRB- William Hill -RRB- .
THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND The proposal to sell William Hill and the retention of Close Brothers Under the supervision of a steering committee of creditor banks , the board of Brent Walker had been disposing of Brent Walker \ xc2 \ x92s assets .
After the sale of the Pubmaster chain , the only significant asset that Brent Walker held was William Hill .
It was obvious in the market that William Hill would be sold by Brent Walker , but the timing and manner of sale was a matter upon which Close Brothers were retained to advise on terms set out in a letter dated 13 May 1997 .
The terms of the letter provided that they would act as financial adviser in relation to the realisation of Brent Walker \ xc2 \ x92s investment in William Hill ; the corporate finance services were : \ t \ xc2 \ x93 ... -LRB- b -RRB- \ tto assist Brent Walker in drafting a detailed proposal for submission to the Steering Committee of members of the Term Facilities Agreement -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93TFA \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- and subsequently to all members of the TFA ; -LRB- c -RRB- \ tto draft a detailed timetable for the implementation of the preferred option -LRB- s -RRB- and agree this with all parties and their advisers ; -LRB- d -RRB- \ tto co-operate with Brent Walker in co-ordinating the activities of its other advisers on the development and implementation of the preferred option -LRB- s -RRB- and to instruct such advisers on behalf of Brent Walker ; \ xc2 \ x94 The agreement provided they would be paid a monthly retainer of \ xc2 \ xa350 ,000 for January and February 1997 , a monthly retainer of \ xc2 \ xa3100 ,000 thereafter until the successful completion of the realisation of William Hill and a success fee calculated as follows : Gross Proceeds Fee \ n basis \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Up to \ xc2 \ xa3500 million 0.45 % \ n of gross proceeds \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa3200 ,000 \ n of the monthly retainer \ xc2 \ xa0 will \ n be offsetable against the \ xc2 \ xa0 success \ n fee \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Between \ xc2 \ xa3500 million - \ xc2 \ xa3600 \ n million 0.45 % \ n of \ xc2 \ xa3500 million \ xc2 \ xa0 plus \ n 1 % of gross proceeds above \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa3500 \ n million \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa3200 ,000 \ n of the monthly retainer \ xc2 \ xa0 will \ n be offsetable against the \ xc2 \ xa0 success \ n fee \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Between \ xc2 \ xa3600 million - \ xc2 \ xa3750 \ n million 0.45 % \ n of \ xc2 \ xa3500 million \ xc2 \ xa0 plus \ n 1 % of \ xc2 \ xa3100 million \ xc2 \ xa0 plus \ n 1 \ xc2 \ xbd % of gross proceeds above \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa3600 \ n million but capped at \ xc2 \ xa3750 \ xc2 \ xa0 million \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa3200 ,000 \ n of the monthly retainer \ xc2 \ xa0 will \ n be offsetable against the \ xc2 \ xa0 success \ n fee Close Brothers were also to be entitled , in addition to their fee , to recover their reasonable out of pocket expenses , including legal and professional fees , incurred in connection with the work .
Mr Becerra had been a trader in the financial markets and for a time was employed at Goldman Sachs , London .
The business of the partnership between Mr Becerra and Mr Page involved international corporate finance with a specific focus on North America and Spain ; to a large extent it involved ad hoc projects .
Page learnt from Mr Dibble , the company secretary of Brent Walker , that William Hill was to be sold by Brent Walker ; he and Mr Becerra decided that they would see if they could become involved .
Mr Page told Mr Leach that he had a few contacts in the Far East who might be interested in Brent Walker ; he asked Mr Leach how he should go about getting them involved .
Assisting Mr Llewellyn-Lloyd in advising Brent Walker was Mr Richard Grainger .
The telephone conversations between Mr Grainger and Mr Page in June 1997 On about 10 June 1997 Mr Leach telephoned Mr Grainger and told him of his conversation with Mr Page and that Mr Page had some contacts in the Far East who might be interested in making a bid for William Hill .
It was the evidence of Mr Gowlland of ABN-Amro and Mr Barrett of Sanwa Bank Limited that they did not expect to receive any fee from Close Brothers in the event a potential client made a successful bid for William Hill .
Close Brothers selected Nomura as their preferred purchaser and commenced final negotiations with them ; one of the results of the negotiations was an additional payment to be made by Nomura to Brent Walker of the cash surplus in William Hill .
Mr Becerra and Mr Page \ xc2 \ x92s contact with Nomura during the bidding process On 22 August 1997 Mr Hands of Nomura contacted Mr Page and asked him if he would act as a consultant to Nomura in relation to the acquisition of William Hill .
Mr Page reported this in an e-mail to Mr Becerra : \ xc2 \ x93Thanks entirely to your earlier offer to Guy Hands , he called this evening asking if I would be willing to assist them in the William Hill deliberations .
I told him that I would , subject to again clearing the conflict issue with Brent Walker and William Hill .
Mr Leach told him that there would be no objection provided that he was not present when another bidder was present at Brent Walker \ xc2 \ x92s offices and provided Mr Page did not consider he personally had a conflict .
He thought that he would inevitably be asked for his advice regarding the appropriate price for William Hill ; if he gave such advice , it could have been against the interests of Brent Walker and its bankers .
\ xc2 \ x93Following discussions with John Leach , on 10 June 1997 I telephoned you to ask if my partner , Larry Becerra and I might independently approach various high net worth individuals in the Far East regarding the William Hill opportunity .
They relied on Miller v Beale -LRB- 1879 -RRB- 27 WR 403 and Turner v Reeve -LRB- 1901 -RRB- TLR 592 .
\ xc2 \ x95 \ tNor was his evidence contradictory to that given by way of statement by Mr Barret of Sanwa as to which of them had raised the William Hill transaction ; they discussed it over a meal and Mr Grainger \ xc2 \ x92s evidence was that it came out of discussion .
Mr Page suggested that there was a difference as Close Brothers was the contracted agent for Brent Walker , but that can not have made a difference .
\ xc2 \ x95 \ tMr Page \ xc2 \ x92s initial request to Mr Dibble for permission to speak to HSBC was plainly on his own initiative and not at the request of Brent Walker .
The use of his knowledge in this way might have been valuable as a potential bidder might have been wary of purchasing a business from Brent Walker given the litigation and other problems surrounding the group ; someone with knowledge of the business would have been able to assist a purchaser with a proper assessment of the William Hill business .
\ xc2 \ x95 \ tIn the first conversation , Mr Page was careful only to seek permission to contact potential bidders in the Far East .
Their approaches to Nomura and to a bidder in the Far East resulted in them having , as Mr Page said , two potential bidders who could have sought to retain them .
The e-mails exchanged with Mr Becerra on 27 August 1997 show that he was concerned to deal with the conflict of interest with Brent Walker ; indeed that is the only conflict he dealt with as he only saw Mr Leach .
It would also seem incongruous that evidence of factual matrix is admissible to construe a written contract in the broad circumstances set out in the speech of Lord Hoffman in Investors Compensation Scheme v West Bromwich Building Society -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR 896 at 912 , yet inadmissible to explain the context of two short telephone conversations .
On each of these points I prefer and accept the evidence of Mr Martin ; he was the more impressive witness and had much greater experience in the City of significant transactions of the scale involved in the sale of William Hill .
Mr Martin had less experience than Mr Cooper in the use of intermediaries , no doubt because of the different nature and calibre of the merchants banks for which they worked .
Mr Martin also did not have experience of dealing with so called \ xc2 \ x93boutique operators \ xc2 \ x94 , though Mr Cooper did .
First , it was common ground that Mr Grainger made no express request of Mr Page ; I have found that Mr Page was in truth and in fact seeking permission to speak to contacts in the Far East and later Nomura .
Mr Cooper referred to various scales , but in his report and in his oral evidence , he was very clear in stating that because of the size of the sale of William Hill , the discount to the scales he suggested would have to be negotiated ; therefore even on his evidence the fee would still have had to be negotiated .
The Court of Appeal reached a similar conclusion in Nahum v Royal Holloway College ... 12 November 1998 , unreported -RRB- .
It is contradicted by what happened in this auction as regards the provision of information to Sanwa and ABN Amro .
Indeed Mr Marshall rightly characterised this evidence in his cross examination of Mr Cooper as absurd in so far as Mr Cooper was suggesting that a merchant bank was appointing an intermediary as its agent in circumstances where all that happened was that -LRB- 1 -RRB- the intermediary approached a merchant bank known to be acting for a seller in a controlled auction , -LRB- 2 -RRB- the bank agreed to the intermediary approaching a potential bidder and -LRB- 3 -RRB- the bank provided that intermediary with information which was not subject to any confidentiality undertaking .
Both ABN Amro and Sanwa are substantial banks and therefore the plaintiffs sought to make a distinction between themselves , as \ xc2 \ x93boutique operators \ xc2 \ x94 , and larger institutions .
In his report , Mr Cooper suggested that in the case of the two banks , they would be seeking to take advantage of their knowledge of the sale of William Hill to demonstrate competence or gain a mandate from an existing client .
That is demonstrated by the fact that they allowed Sanwa and ABN Amro to approach their clients and the plaintiffs to have freedom to approach anyone in the Far East .
They relied on Wood v Dantata -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 2 EGLR 23 and Nahum v Royal Holloway College .
If such a request had been made out , I would then have had to consider whether there were special circumstances showing that it was intended that the services should be gratuitous : see Sharab v Salfiti and Goff and Jones : The Law of Restitution 5th edit -LRB- 1998 -RRB- at page 18 .
Although he accepted that the law of restitution was a developing part of the law of England and Wales , nonetheless he maintained that , if there was no request , there was no legal basis for a restitutionary claim in the circumstances of this case .
He founded his argument upon a passage in Goff and Jones , at page 18 : \ xc2 \ x93A true request will normally lead to the conclusion that the defendant who requested the services has contractually bound himself to pay for them .
The principle set out in Goff and Jones has been supported and developed by Professor Birks in his Introduction to the Law of Restitution -LRB- see Chapter 8 -RRB- .
I will , assume therefore that there is in the law of restitution of England and Wales a principle of free acceptance .
Mr Marshall helpfully referred to Brewer Street Investment v Barclays Woollen Co -LSB- 1954 -RSB- 1 QB 428 , British Steel Corpn v Cleveland Bridge -LSB- 1984 -RSB- 1 WLR 504 and Hosking v Legal & General Ventures Ltd -LRB- Court of Appeal , 12 February 1999 -RRB- .
He relied on and adopted as his argument a further passage in Goff and Jones : -LRB- p 22 -RRB- \ xc2 \ x93At one time English courts did not enquire whether a defendant had been incontrovertibly benefited ; he was not deemed to receive a benefit unless he requested or freely accepted the services .
However , given the findings I have made I do not think it necessary or appropriate to reach a final view on whether this principle forms part of the law of restitution of England and Wales .
\ xc2 \ x94 As is said in Goff and Jones at page 62 , if a defendant was required to make restitution in every case where a plaintiff had conferred the benefit whilst acting in his own self interest , it would open a Pandora \ xc2 \ x92s box of claims .
He referred to a scale of fees used by Lehman Brothers in the USA as a basis for fees charged by them to a client ; he said that the scale had received widespread adoption outside the USA .
Until early December 1998 , the first defendant , Sheikh Fahad , was represented by Mr Field Q.C. , Mr Knowles and Mr Zacaroli and the fifth defendant , Mr Jaffar , by Mr Jarvis Q.C .
Mr Coll , with my leave , represents the nineteenth , twentieth , twenty-first and twenty-second defendants , Croesus International Limited -LRB- `` Croesus '' -RRB- , Wantley Developments Limited -LRB- `` Wantley '' -RRB- , Coggia 1 B.V. -LRB- `` Coggia '' -RRB- and Riquel B.V. -LRB- `` Riquel '' -RRB- , all of which were and are his creature companies .
A significant part of this responsibility has been at all material times carried out through its London office , the Kuwait Investment Office -LRB- `` KIO '' -RRB- , based at St Vedast House , Cheapside , EC2 .
The only information about these accounts which Mr Ball passed to Mr Betts , the KIO \ 's chief financial officer , consisted in consolidated monthly totals .
One witness , Mr Robinson , described the KIO \ 's attitude to the secrecy of its external accounts as `` paranoid '' .
The KIO acquired control of GT through offshore companies - in particular through two Netherlands Antilles companies , Hainingend Holdings B.V. and Clachard Holdings N.V. , which in turn owned two Netherlands companies , Koolmees Holdings B.V. -LRB- `` Koolmees '' -RRB- and Kokmeeuw Holdings B.V. -LRB- `` Kokmeeuw '' -RRB- .
Kokmeeuw acquired about 25 % of GT \ 's shares in Spain while further holdings of 24 % and -LRB- it seems -RRB- 3 % were acquired through Swiss external accounts with the relevant banks -LRB- Lombard Odier & Cie and Pictet et Cie. -RRB- acting , it seems , as nominees for the KIO .
An unsuccessful rights issue in November 1988 led to shares which had not been not taken up by the market being acquired by companies controlled by Mr de la Rosa -LRB- in particular by companies which can be called simply Folma , Philby , CAOS and MIRA -RRB- .
Mr de la Rosa has contended that the shareholdings held by Folma , Philby , CAOS and MIRA were in fact held for the KIO or for its subsidiaries , but this is not accepted -LRB- and is I understand the subject of Spanish proceedings -RRB- .
He returned to Kuwait to work in the Ministry of Finance until 1964 .
Mr Jaffar was deputy chairman and general manager of the KIO from 1st July 1984 until 21st April 1990 .
Although formally he resigned , he did so because the KIA had decided that he should be recalled to Kuwait , in the context -LRB- according to evidence of the KIA \ 's then managing director , Dr Al-Rashed -RRB- of its desire to gain greater control over the KIO .
During the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait , which began on 4th August 1990 , the KIO in London , by reason of its position and control over very substantial Kuwaiti assets , acquired central importance in the efforts to recover Kuwait .
During that period and in that context , Mr Jaffar returned to the offices of the KIO to assist on a voluntary part time basis which he described to me as advisory rather than executive .
After starting a master \ 's degree in London , he devoted himself full-time to training and then working with the KIO .
Sheikh Fahad held out to him the prospect that he would succeed Mr Jaffar as general manager , but the Finance Minister of Kuwait , who chaired the KIA , would not agree , and Sheikh Fahad himself re-assumed the office .
He visited London regularly , where , according to Mr Betts , he would on each visit meet Mr Ball who took a particular interest in Spain .
On technical accounting matters , Mr Puig and Mr Coll were involved .
Neither Mr Betts nor Mr Nigel Black -LRB- an investment manager with the KIO from March 1989 -RRB- experienced or heard of any respect in which Mr Folchi \ 's services , conduct or co-operation gave rise to concern .
Mrs Parker has made a career as a linguist , graduating from the University of London as a Bachelor of Education in 1976 and from the University of Reading with an MA in applied linguistics in 1984 and possessing various other diplomas .
In England she had used as her accountants the firm Russell Limebeer , which then had English and Jersey branches .
Mr Coll was born in 1953 in Gibraltar .
He graduated with a BSc in Economics and Business at the University of Wales in 1974 , and became an accountant and member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales in 1978 .
He served his articles with Touche Ross & Co. in London , after which he moved in 1980 to Touche Ross in Barcelona .
He thus met Mr Jaffar , president of Inpacsa , Mr Robinson , a director , and Mr Folchi , Inpacsa \ 's legal adviser .
Mr Russell , who incorporated Coll & Co. was introduced to Mr Coll by Mr Folchi .
Croesus , Wantley , Coggia and Riquel are represented by and are creature companies of Mr Coll .
Mr Moukarzel was born in 1964 , educated in England and graduated with a physics degree from Imperial College .
While working with Mercury Asset Management -LRB- `` MAM '' -RRB- , he met Mr Vasconcellos who had responsibility for Spain .
II .1 Croesus By undated letter in about May 1988 Mr de la Rosa requested the KIO to advance the sum of $ 27.4 m `` corresponding to payment of services rendered by -LSB- sic -RSB- TORRAS HOSTENCH S.A. and by companies making up its Group between September 1987 and May of 1988 .
The letter was then submitted to Mr Betts , the KIO \ 's chief financial officer , by Mr Robinson , head of the KIO projects department responsible for direct investments in Spain , together with a memorandum requesting payment from Koolmees \ ' account to Republic Bank of New York `` for the account of Merrill Lynch Bank Suisse , No .
On 31st May 1988 Mr Betts asked Mr Robinson for repayment terms and interest rates with a view to drawing up a loan agreement between Kokmeeuw and GT .
On about 2nd June 1988 five payments totalling $ 5,996,000 were made out of Bigley \ 's account 261319 by bearer cheques which were paid into an account Carnation at Bank of America , Geneva .
Mr Robinson left the KIO in late March 1989 .
Mr Nigel Black , who joined the KIO at about the same time , visited GT in mid-April .
On his return Mr Black wrote pointing out that the loan was outstanding , first to Mr Betts on 19th April 1989 , and then to Mr Ball with copy to Mr Jaffar and others on 31st May 1989 .
Mr Black visited GT again on 12th/13th June 1989 and wrote this further memorandum to Mr Betts with copy to Mr Ball dated 14th June 1989 : `` Mr de la Rosa gave me a copy of a draft agreement that was never signed , between Torras Hostench and KIO for a loan from the office to T-H .
In July 1989 Mr Nigel Black was informed by Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar that it had been agreed to swap these notes for THL notes .
In a memorandum dated 20th July 1989 addressed to Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar , Mr Dawson , Sheikh Khaled , Mr Ball and another , Mr Black reported that Mr de la Rosa had told him that THL would discount Conycon/Grueyesa notes with banks and use the proceeds to pay down existing debt , `` including an amount owing to Kokmeeuw of about US$ 30m '' .
On 25th July 1989 by an agreement entered into in Spanish in Tarragona , Koolmees represented by Mr Nigel Black agreed the swap with THL represented by Mr Vasconcellos ; THL \ 's notes were to carry a higher effective interest rate than Conycon \ 's and Grucsya \ 's .
Under a loan agreement dated 15th September 1989 executed in Madrid by Mr Soler with Mr Folchi attending , THL procured a loan of $ 25m from Banco Santander \ 's London branch , using two of the guaranteed promissory notes as collateral .
The $ 25m was on 18th September 1989 transferred to Kokmeeuw \ 's account at Amro Bank , London .
That sum was paid to Kokmeeuw \ 's London account on 16th October 1989 from an account Stuart 130900 at Banker \ 's Trust , Geneva , with the indication that the authorising customer was `` one of our clients '' .
130670 , 130671 and 130900 -RRB- at Bankers Trust , Geneva on 13th July 1989 , in each case as beneficial owner and in each case on a basis giving him and/or his wife signing rights .
Around the same time , Mr de Mir arranged for Mr Soler to remit an equivalent sum from GT to THL , and on 13th and 20th November 1989 Mr Moukarzel on behalf of THL instructed payments to account Stuart 130900 at Bankers Trust , Geneva of first $ 1,576,707 and then $ 1m , so reimbursing $ 2,576,707 to the Stuart account .
In his evidence , he suggested that he had done this on instructions received from a Mr Puig or Mr Catala , members of GT \ 's accountancy department in Spain , but he accepted that it could have been from Mr Coll , to whom he in fact addressed drafts of the agreement , and I think this more probable .
Its directors were Messrs. Russell , Axford and Lewin and Mrs Collins , respectively 13th , 25th , 27th and 26th defendants in these proceedings until they reached an accommodation with the plaintiffs .
According to an internal memorandum by Mr Russell dated 21st July 1989 , on 19th July 1989 Mrs Parker telephoned from Barcelona to request that a structure be set up immediately .
THL was to borrow money from the United Kingdom branch of a Spanish bank and to pay it to Oakthorn , which was to be `` required to pay an amount of Pesetas 5 billion immediately to two accounts in Switzerland , with full details being given by Carin Parker , to enable the remainder of the transaction to proceed .
On 25th July 1989 Mr Russell wrote solemnly to Mr de la Rosa referring to GT \ 's `` recent kind appointment of ourselves to try to find international partners to assist with the expansion of -LSB- GT -RSB- '' and asking whether GT had any objection to Oakthorn using Wardbase `` as our agent '' , with a view to GT remitting any monies due to a United Kingdom company .
Under a loan agreement dated 27th July 1989 executed in Madrid by Mr Vasconcellos with Mr Folchi attending , Banco Santander \ 's London branch lent THL $ 55m , secured by a pledge of five of the Conycon/Grucsya promissory notes obtained under the swap arrangement with Koolmees dated 25th July 1989 .
This $ 55m was remitted to Oakthorn \ 's account at Royal Bank of Scotland -LRB- `` RBS '' -RRB- , London branch -LRB- with which Mr Russell \ 's firm communicated in practice through RBS , Jersey branch -RRB- , and on 28th July 1989 Mrs Parker addressed instructions to Oakthorn by memorandum to Mr Russell requesting him to pay out $ 50m in three tranches - $ 37.5 m to Lombard Odier , Geneva `` Attention : Thierry Lombard '' , $ 7.5 m to Privat Bank , Zurich `` Attention : Mr Rudy Frei '' and $ 5m to Bankers Trust , Geneva `` Attention : Mr Yves .
The $ 7.5 m paid to Privat Bank went into the account designated Fairview held by Jakhal Foundation , a Liechtenstein family foundation in which Mr Jaffar had the life interest and his family the remainder .
His receipt of the $ 7.5 m came to light from the text of a letter located by the plaintiffs on the hard disk of Mr Jaffar \ 's former secretary \ 's computer at the KIO .
Mr Jaffar \ 's pleaded case is that the sum was paid to him , by agreement reached between Sheikh Fahad and the Minister of Oil of Kuwait in early 1989 , as a commission or bonus for his successful efforts in relation to the acquisition and disposal by the KIO of British Petroleum shares , and that he had no idea that it originated in the $ 55m .
The $ 5m paid to Bankers Trust went into Stuart account 103900 , in consequence of instructions sent in the name of Mr Folchi and his firm to Mr Byrde as follows : `` As per our telecon , you shall probably be receiving on Monday , July 31st a transfer from Royal Bank of Scotland , London branch , in the amount of US$ 5 million .
Other payments included $ 900,000 to a United Kingdom company , Setsar Limited , on 19th July 1990 , from which originated a payment of $ 775,373 on 13th November 1990 to account `` Falcon '' at Bankers Trust , Geneva .
On 6th June 1990 Mr de la Rosa spoke to Mr Betts , explaining that half of the facility would be used to fund a put option exercised by Banco Santander and the balance to finance short term market bank borrowings , and that it would after four months be refinanced by the banks .
Using such bills as security on 11th June 1990 Mr Soler , on the instructions he told me of Mr Nunez , arranged a loan of $ 50m from The Sumitomo Bank Ltd. of Barcelona to THL \ 's Barclays Bank account in London .
On the same day , on Mr Soler \ 's instructions , Mr Moukarzel wrote to Barclays Bank asking them to remit the $ 50m to Oakthorn once it had been received from Spain .
30755601 at Chemical Bank , London , the account name being given as `` F.M .
Jaffar '' ; and $ 2m was to go to Chemical Bank , New York , account `` Montrex Inc. '' These instructions were implemented .
Mr Folchi \ 's evidence was that Mr de la Rosa gave him such instructions in May 1990 , together with an additional instruction to pay $ 15.5 m to Bankers Trust , account Stuart ; and that Mr de la Rosa specifically instructed him to tell Mr Russell to warn Chemical Bank about the impending arrival of $ 22.5 m in account 30755600 in the name of Sheikh Fahad .
From the $ 22.5 m received into Sheikh Fahad \ 's Chemical Bank account , $ 10m was on or about 12th June 1991 transferred to an account in Sheikh Fahad \ 's name at Overseas Union Bank in Singapore , and on or about 1st April 1992 a further \ xc2 \ xa34 ,417,666 was transferred to a National Westminster Bank plc , Jersey account of Abacus Nominees -LSB- Ltd. -RSB- -LRB- `` Abacus Nominees '' -RRB- for Abacus -LRB- C.I. .
-LRB- The Abacus companies were offshore trust vehicles within the Coopers & Lybrand group .
The monies thus passed without consideration from the Chemical Bank account to Abacus -LRB- C.I .
By fax dated 13th June , but sent -LRB- it appears -RRB- on 12th June , 1990 , and signed by Mr Folchi , Mr Russell was instructed under the heading `` All Sports Promotions '' to pay away to Bankers Trust , attention Mr Y. Byrde , account 130900 $ 13m on 13th June and $ 2.49 m on 18th June 1990 .
On 5th July 1990 Mr Russell for Oakthorn , witnessed by Mrs Parker , and on 9th July 1990 Mr de la Rosa for GT , witnessed by Mr Folchi , signed an `` asset marketing agreement '' .
On 2nd October there travelled to Geneva Mr Russell from Jersey and Mr Folchi and Mrs Parker from Spain .
All three on 2nd October and Mr Folchi and Mr Russell on 3rd October had a series of meetings at Bankers Trust , with Mr Walter Schnell and Mr Yves Byrde in particular .
During the meetings , Mr Russell signed and Mr Folchi counter-signed a letter produced by Bankers Trust which instructed the payment away of monies to be lent to Pincinco as follows : -LRB- i -RRB- $ 80m to SOGENAL , attention Mr Haussler from Lancaster ; -LRB- ii -RRB- $ 75m , to Lombard Odier , attention Mr Thierry Lombard from Lancaster ; -LRB- iii -RRB- $ 100m to BTAG -LSB- i.e .
Bankers Trust A.G. -RSB- , attention Mr Yves Byrde to Stuart ; -LRB- iv -RRB- $ 15m to Chemical Bank New York , attention Mr Daniel McKay , for account C.I. / 83536 Montrex Inc. , Ref .
Collier ; -LRB- v -RRB- $ 15m , to Union Bank of Switzerland -LRB- `` UBS '' -RRB- , Geneva , account 281 987.00 E , Ref .
Box 8039 - Zurich , attention Rudy Frei ; -LRB- vii -RRB- Ptas .450 m to BTAG Geneva , attention Mr Yves Byrde to Stuart and -LRB- viii -RRB- $ 1.1 m to Merrill Lynch , Geneva , account Bigley .
Mr de Prado is a Spanish businessman with connections with the Spanish royal Palace , and has acted on occasions as special envoy for Spain , including to the Emir of Kuwait .
The Stuart account statements received through Juge Tappolet now show that what Mr de la Rosa then said was untrue as regards the Lombard Odier transfers -LRB- though $ 7m was sent to Mr Jaffar at that bank on 20th February 1991 , as mentioned below -RRB- .
The actual position is that $ 5m was paid out of Stuart account 130900 in two tranches of $ 4m and $ 1m on 6th February and 4th April 1991 to Mr Oberson \ 's general client account at UBS , each such payment being covered by monies transferred from Stuart account 130671 .
Out of Stuart account 130900 , $ 1m was also paid to Mr Jaffar \ 's Jakhal Foundation account at Rud Blass Bank on 20th November 1990 , being covered within two or so days by monies transferred from account 130671 .
A further $ 7m was transferred out of account 130900 to Mr Jaffar \ 's Dorset Corporation account at Lombard Odier , being covered within two days by monies from Stuart account 130671 .
At a time before his receipt of the $ 1m and $ 7m out of the Stuart account was discovered , Mr Jaffar pleaded that this $ 4m was received in repayment of sums owed to him by GT and/or the KIO in respect of the Hammarstone transaction , to which I return in section IV .2 -LRB- f -RRB- .
Account Bigley , the destination of the $ 1.1 m in item -LRB- viii -RRB- , can , as in the context of Croesus , now be seen to equate with Mr Enrique Sarasola .
On 8th October Mr Russell signed a power of attorney in Mrs Parker \ 's favour to represent Pincinco vis-a-vis Bankers Trust , and on 23rd October Mrs Parker instructed Bankers Trust to pay a further $ 267,500 to account Falcon .
In outline , with the aid of a notional bridging loan from Banco Santander , Mr Coll \ 's creature company Coggia advanced $ 319m to Pincinco which repaid Bankers Trust , which repaid THL and in turn lent the sum to Coggia .
The deposit by THL with Bankers Trust was in this way replaced by a loan by THL to Coggia .
In greater detail , what happened was that , at an extraordinary general meetings of GT on 5th July 1991 , a resolution was passed to acquire all shares not owned by Koolmees , Kokmeeuw , CAOS , Philby , MIRA and GT itself at a price of Ptas .
By a whole series of written agreements carrying dates in September , November and December 1991 , Riquel swapped the 2,375,000 new shares issued to it for 2,196,056 existing GT shares held by Philby , MIRA and Folma .
For similar reasons , there is no substance in an agreement signed and dated as made on 4th September 1989 in Barcelona between Mr Nunez for Torras Papel and Mr Russell for Wardbase .
Any suggestion that this might involve some undeserved slur on Mr Russell , as signatory to the document dated 4th September 1989 , is alleviated by an extraordinary letter dated 26th May 1992 obtained from RBS Jersey \ 's files , in which Mr Russell made no mention of any agreement dated 4th September 1989 , and sought to explain the operation to the bank in different but equally fictitious terms , as involving the repayment by GT of Swiss borrowings said to have arisen from purchasing CdA in 1990 and in relation to which Mr Russell said that Anslow had had some promissory note involvement .
On the same day , according to a form signed by Mr Russell , a board meeting of Wardbase took place on Sark resolving to open an account at RBS London .
payable to RBS London .
On 4th May 1992 , a firm of Spanish lawyers , Arraut & Asociados , wrote to Mr Nunez at Torras Papel referring to the agreement dated 4th September 1989 and to Mrs Parker \ 's demand for payment , and threatening to contact the KIO and/or commence legal proceedings if payment was not forthcoming within 15 days .
Mrs Parker in turn gave Mr Russell -LRB- with copy to RBS -RRB- instructions for `` pay-away '' value 26th May 1992 of Ptas .1.9 b by Wardbase to Oakthorn , then to Anslow , and finally to Bank SOGENAL , account ADNHIL in Geneva , keeping the value dates `` extremely tight '' .
Mr Ricardo Gomez of CPA Touche Ross appears to have become a partner in Coopers & Lybrand Barcelona in mid-1990 .
By 4th June 1990 Touche Ross London had expressed a wish to know the rationale of the Croesus and Oakthorn 1 loans , and Mr Coll prepared a letter for Mr Soler to sign .
On 14th June 1990 , apparently as a condition of their audit satisfaction in respect of THL , Touche Ross also received a guarantee signed by Mr Nunez for GT in respect of the liabilities of Croesus and Oakthorn to THL .
On this basis , Touche Ross London was evidently prepared to sign off on THL \ 's accounts , but not without writing on 22nd June to Mr Gomez at Coopers & Lybrand Barcelona , as GT group auditors , pointing out that the recoverability of the Croesus and Oakthorn loans was now a matter for consideration at group level .
Mr Gomez \ 's reaction was that this meant that he could not issue his report on GT , and to ask for details about Croesus and Oakthorn .
Touche Ross London also devoted to the problem of the Croesus and Oakthorn loans one and a half pages of a five page letter dated 26th June 1990 to Mr Nigel Black enclosing THL \ 's draft accounts .
In the meanwhile , Sheikh Fahad must have sent a copy of Mr Al-Haroon \ 's letter to Mr de la Rosa , because by fax message to Sheikh Fahad on 3rd July 1990 Mr de la Rosa `` clarified '' the queries raised by Mr Al-Haroon in respect of Croesus and Oakthorn as follows : `` As you know , the loans to these companies were authorised by the board and the amounts were paid by these companies to KIO as repayment of offbook funds advanced to Grupo Torras .
The operations and management of the Group are the responsibility of the Board of Directors and the Office is well represented .
The invasion of Kuwait by Iraq on 2nd August 1990 and the crisis which followed can not explain Sheikh Fahad \ 's attitude and conduct prior to that date .
Mr de Mir , Mr Nunez , Mr Guasch and other Spanish directors also resigned , although they were re-appointed on 1st June 1992 .
The minutes recorded : `` The General Meeting hereby accepts the resignations presented and unreservedly approves the management activities undertaken by the same in the exercise of their appointments , thanking them for the services rendered , especially the Deputy Chairman Mr ... de la Rosa and - posthumously - Mr ... Ball '' The directorships of Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar and Sheikh Khaled were recorded as terminated , with the rider that `` The management activities undertaken in the course of their appointments ... .
On 6th July 1992 GT \ 's parlous financial state and the level of the KIO \ 's financial commitment led the KIO \ 's executive committee to appoint accountants -LRB- KPMG -RRB- and lawyers -LRB- Stephenson Harwood -RRB- to investigate GT \ 's managerial , financial and legal position .
In September and October 1992 there took place meetings between these investigators and one or other of Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar , Mr de la Rosa , Mr Folchi and Mr Russell .
Evidence about these was given by Mr Fordham of Stephenson Harwood , who produced notes or transcripts , as well as by Mr Folchi in his supplemental witness statement and oral evidence .
Within the next few days , when Mr Fordham telephoned Mr Folchi , Mr Folchi appears to have confirmed Mr Russell \ 's connection , and Mr Fordham , without telling Mr Folchi , then paid a visit at short notice to Mr Russell .
Mr Fordham asked Mr Russell to `` gather together the papers on the matters raised in the meeting '' and to arrange a meeting with Mr Folchi , preferably in Jersey .
On 29th September 1992 , Mr Fordham met Mr Folchi again , who indicated that he thought that the monies in the Croesus , Oakthorn and Pincinco -LRB- `` Coggia '' -RRB- transactions had , minus expenses , left the off-shore companies to which they had been paid and gone to Switzerland , to accounts numbered in a coded name , that he had been instructed not to keep details of the accounts to which the monies had been transferred for reasons of confidentiality , and had instructed Mr Russell accordingly , though the banks would have all the details .
On 7th October Mr Folchi indicated that Mr Russell and he had met in Barcelona on the Sunday -LRB- 4th October -RRB- and agreed a procedure for Mr Russell to make available information from the files of off-shore companies involved in the transactions , which he said were also active on behalf of other clients .
At a further meeting on 9th October 1992 , Mr Folchi indicated that he now had a letter from the manager of the off-shore companies , the Sierra Trust Company -LRB- run by Mr Russell \ 's firm -RRB- , counter-signed by RBS , but that he wished , out of concern about potential damage to the KIO and the State of Kuwait , to have the KIO \ 's and the State of Kuwait \ 's express written authorisation before releasing it .
On 7th , 14th and 19th October 1992 Mr Fordham saw Mr de la Rosa , who said Pincinco was connected with the war effort , and indicated that he could not assist on the Croesus and Oakthorn operations or , it appears , the Wardbase operation .
On 22nd October 1992 Mr Fordham met Mr Jaffar , and discussed a number of matters .
On 29th October 1992 Mr Fordham had a long interview -LRB- which was transcribed -RRB- in Barcelona with Mr Folchi , who was attended by his solicitor , Mr Richards of Lawrence Graham .
So , on 13th and 15th November 1992 Mr Folchi accompanied by Mr Richards met representatives of the Attorney General and the KIO to discuss matters which Mr Folchi then identified as being , broadly , the operation of KIO external accounts , the KIO \ 's status in Spain and black money and political payments .
He also said that throughout this period he was convinced that the KIO and Kuwaiti authorities \ ' investigation was not bona fide , and that it was associated with the internal political situation in Kuwait , which he did not understand .
The background to the meeting , according to Sheikh Khaled \ 's understanding , was that Mr Al-Bader and Mr Al-Rowdan had reported to the Prime Minister of Kuwait that Sheikh Fahad and Mr de la Rosa had embezzled funds , and the Prime Minister had told them that , if this was so , they should do whatever was necessary to pursue the matter and had sent Sheikh Ali to England in an attempt to ascertain the truth .
As a result of this request , on 23rd October 1992 Mr Folchi received $ 2m paid by Sheikh Fahad from account G772 with Lombard Odier in Geneva to Drake Consulting Ltd. -LRB- `` Drake '' -RRB- , a vehicle provided for Mr Folchi presumably by Mr Russell .
Sheikh Khaled told me that he spoke to Mr Paul Dawson , who arranged the payment with Mr de la Rosa .
In 1994 Mr Folchi and Mr Jaffar agreed that this sum should be transferred to another of Mr Russell \ 's companies , Roundabout , for legal costs .
Mr Jaffar \ 's conduct in transferring the proceeds of the dividend to Mr Folchi is on any view hard to square with any idea that Hammarstone belonged to GT or the KIO or that Mr Jaffar was acting for GT or the KIO in the Hammarstone operation .
The companies which he represents are Croesus and Wantley , which are sued only in respect of the Croesus transaction , and Coggia and Riquel which are sued as members of the Castle Trust in respect of all transactions except Croesus .
So far as they challenge the capacity of GT to instruct Baker & McKenzie or Baker & McKenzie \ 's authority to act on GT \ 's behalf they should normally have been resolved on application prior to trial : Russian Commercial and Industrial Bank v. Comptoir d \ ` Escompte de Mulhouse -LSB- 1925 -RSB- A.C. 112 ; Banco de Bilbao v. Sancha -LSB- 1938 -RSB- 2 K.B .
Shortly thereafter , on 24th May 1996 GT and THL commenced a second set of proceedings against Sheikh Fahad , Mr Robinson , Mr Jaffar , Sheikh Khaled , Mr de la Rosa and Mr de Mir -LRB- action 1996 Folio No .
Mr McGhee suggested that Professor Ramos \ 's evidence was marked by extra-ordinary inconsistencies and changes of position and that Mr Diaz-Bastien and Professor Cortes were generally to be preferred .
Mr McGhee also concentrated considerable criticisms on Professor Ramos \ 's oral evidence in relation to article 5.4 and suggested that these undermined his reliability generally .
Mr McGhee for Sheikh Khaled did not suggest the contrary , relying -LRB- in support of his submissions that the matter was not actionable in Spain -RRB- merely on non-compliance with articles 134 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Companies Act and article 5.4 of the Law of Suspension of Payments .
If one treats the problem as one of lack of authority on the part of English solicitors , Baker & McKenzie , to bring the present English proceedings , it certainly has an English element .
I am here concerned with English not Spanish proceedings ; and it is English not Spanish law which governs the question whether the present proceedings , if viewed as begun by Baker & McKenzie without authority , may be ratified by GT .
Whether Baker & McKenzie had actual authority to begin the proceedings turns upon whether they received instructions from anyone able to give such instructions on behalf of GT .
\ ' '' Professor Ramos says that `` the most authoritative Commercial Doctrine '' is reflected in this passage from Uria-Menendez-Munoz \ 's `` Comentario al regimen de las sociedades mercantiles '' -LRB- Madrid , 1992 , V , p. 317 -RRB- : `` However , one can not underestimate -LRB- to avoid an `` excessively strict '' interpretation of the Law of 1951 , as emphasised by the Supreme Court -LRB- see STS 7/2/1994 -RRB- the well known legal principle that the rule established in art .
Quite apart from the element of unjustified representation by Baker & McKenzie as GT \ 's solicitors which is inherent in the manner in which the defendants primarily put their case , I am wholly unpersuaded that the very technical distinction on which the defendants rely would really appeal to or represent the basis of a Spanish court \ 's resolution of the present issue .
One more example of this flexibility , again no doubt not directly applicable but relevant for its general approach , is found in the decision of the Audiencia Provincial of Barcelona -LRB- SAP , Barcelona , 14th February 1992 , Rev .
Despite the requirement of `` prior '' authorisation , the Barcelona court held : `` Once the `` legitimatio ad processum '' of the receivership is recognised , the absence of the authorisation by the Commissioners does not necessarily suppose the nullity of the proceedings , since not all breaches of Law incur the extreme sanction of the voidness of absolute rights , and without prejudice to the fact that other effects could cause this absence -LRB- as in the case of insufficient `` postulacion '' -LRB- procedural representation -RRB- -RRB- it is true that rectification should have been possible under the third rule of art. 693 of LEC with the consequence of rectification during the proceedings .
But Professor Ramos \ 's more pragmatic approach seems more likely to represent day-to-day practice in Spain .
624 , GT \ 's receivers reported on the nature of the proposed proceedings to the supervising judge of Court 20 in Madrid .
Mr McGhee is also able to criticise Professor Ramos for apparent inconsistency , in relation to the question whether judicial consent was required if the receiver did report to the judge .
But the answers on which Mr McGhee particularly relies in this regard were given in the form of short assents to propositions put in cross-examination right at the outset of Professor Ramos \ 's evidence -LRB- e.g .
The said rules limit the capacity to appear in Court of the suspended in order to bring actions to recover credits owed to it , as provided by the Special law of 26 July 1922 , regardless the fact that the claimed credit was borne before or after the petition of suspension of payments was filed , because articles 4 , 5 and 6 of the said Law do not make a distinction , and the last article making it very clear that while the Court does not provide for a new administration of the suspended , the suspended will receive any payment with the intervention of the Receivers , whatever the amount of the credit and its nature may be ; and as the plaintiff has failed to give evidence on the fact that he had been authorised by his creditors or by the Court , this means that his capacity was uncompleted as expressed by the first rule of article 6 , and furthermore the receivers have not amended the said defect on the capacity of the suspended during these proceedings , and therefore it is fully applicable the rule that makes the acts and contracts of the suspended null and void and of no legal force -LRB- second last paragraph in line of the said article -RRB- , and with accordance with articles 1 , 2 , 533-2 \ xc2 \ xb0 of the Civil Proceedings Code , leading to the decision that the exception raised by C.S.A -LRB- the defendant -RRB- has to be upheld .
The defendants point out , correcting Professor Ramos \ 's report , that the first objection raised in this case was stated by the Court in general terms , as involving breach of articles 5 , 6 and 17 of the LSP , and lack of legitimation to exercise the actions , and not specifically as involving lack of a receivers \ ' report or judicial authorisation under article 5.4 .
-LRB- Professor Ramos \ 's report -RRB- `` Actions against managing partners and directors of companies will end after four years , counting from the date upon which they ceased acting as directors for whatever reason '' Both Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar contend that they ceased to be involved in the running of GT prior to 26th May 1992 - Mr Jaffar says in 1990 and Sheikh Fahad says as from 12th February 1992 when he tendered his resignation as chairman of the KIO or from 8th April 1992 , when his resignation was accepted as effective .
Again , I have hear expert evidence , based on reports by Professors Ramos and Villaverde for the plaintiffs and Professor Cortes for Sheikh Fahad .
My task in respect of article 949 , is complicated by the fact that , by the time Professors Ramos and Villaverde were called -LRB- on , respectively , 25/26th January 1999 and 2nd February 1999 -RRB- , Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar had withdrawn from active participation and ceased to be legally represented .
Professors Villaverde and Ramos were - in consequence of Sheikh Fahad \ 's and Mr Jaffar \ 's own decisions to withdraw - not therefore cross-examined about article 949 , when they gave their evidence , since -LRB- in contrast to the position relating to other aspects of Spanish law -RRB- no other defendants were interested in that article .
But Sheikh Fahad , by his own choice , did not cross-examine either of Professors Villaverde and Ramos .
The fact that Professors Villaverde and Ramos did not have the opportunity they should have had to respond in cross-examination on contentious points is a matter which I have to bear in mind , when weighing the expert evidence given before me .
As stated in section I. 3 , Mr Jaffar resigned his position at the KIO from 20th April 1990 .
It was announced at an executive committee meeting of the KIO attended by Mr Jaffar in February 1990 that Mr Al-Haroon would be appointed as vice-chairman of GT in his place .
Suggestions put to various witnesses that a party held in Spain by another GT director , Mr Manuel Guasch , in or about spring 1990 was a retirement party for Mr Jaffar were not endorsed by those witnesses or made good by any evidence .
At a meeting of the KIO executive committee on 18th/19th September 1991 , Mr Jaffar \ 's continuing directorship of GT was noted by members , and Sheikh Fahad explained that it was `` temporary until the AGM of the company is convened '' .
An executive summary of a presentation on the KIO \ 's investments in Spain given by KPMG Peat Marwick to the KIO in December 1991 said that five Kuwaiti representatives were on GT \ 's board , and listed them as including Mr Jaffar and Mr Dawson -LRB- in each case with the comment `` Resignation tendered '' -RRB- .
It is apparent , however , from the involvement which I hold -LRB- in sections IV and V -RRB- that he had in the Croesus , Oakthorn and Pincinco transactions , that he must to some degree have liaised with Mr de la Rosa and Mr Jaffar in respect of the affairs of GT .
3/1992 of the Ministry of Finance , President of the Board of Directors of KIA \ tMinistry of Finance , President of the Board of Directors of KIA .
Identity of facts investigated in the Spanish criminal proceedings and of the facts on which the claim is filed in England were based are now absolutely identical -LRB- although in Spain other facts are also being investigated -RRB- .
at pp. 25 ; from which it followed , in the judgments of both myself and the Court of Appeal , which bind Mr Folchi , that -LRB- whatever civil issues may have been raised in the Spanish criminal proceedings at any time -RRB- this court was and remains the court `` first seised '' of the claims and issues relating to the Croesus , Oakthorn I and Oakthorn II , Pincinco and Wardbase operations in action 1993 Folio No .
3 have already resolved that if a civil judgment is issued in England , this decision can not be accepted or executed in Spain until the Spanish criminal proceedings are determined , and only to the extent on which the judgment issued in England be compatible with the decision of the Spanish criminal proceedings .
It appears from the evidence of Professor Ramos and from the decision of the Audiencia Nacional of 16th November 1998 , which Mr Folchi put before me , that , if a separate civil action had been commenced in Spain , the effect of the current Spanish criminal proceedings , or of their extension to cover the Croesus , Oakthorn 1 and 2 , Pincinco and Wardbase operations , would have been to suspend pursuit of the separate civil action .
The four documents on which he particularly relies are -LRB- 1 -RRB- a report dated 17th Junee 1993 by the Financial and Economic Affairs Committee to the President of the Kuwaiti National Assembly , -LRB- 2 -RRB- a letter dated May 1994 from the Kuwaiti Ambassador to Spain to the Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait , -LRB- 3 -RRB- a request for judicial co-operation dated 30th June 1997 by the Department of Justice of the State of Kuwait to the Swiss Federal Police , Berne and -LRB- 3 -RRB- a reply -LRB- in or about October 1994 -RRB- in proceedings brought in Barcelona by Folma and MIRA against the KIO .
In a document which actually refers to the English proceedings -LRB- begun by GT and THL -RRB- , such references can not conceivably be read as indicating that even the Committee of the Kuwaiti National Assembly thought that the KIO was plaintiff -LRB- it was not -RRB- or that the KIO alone suffered loss .
The \ ` KIO \ ' in this document is clearly referred to compendiously by the Committee to include GT - as in the further phrase `` the defendants , as directors of the KIO -LSB- sic -RSB- in Spain '' used in the section headed \ ` Evaluation \ ' .
In point of fact , all it shows is that a request by the Kuwaiti government in May 1993 for support in the U.N. Security Council on a matter relating to the borders between Kuwait and Iraq met a response that the attitude of the State of Kuwait to GT and the Kuwaiti investment in Spain was intolerable .
Sheikh Fahad \ 's statement in his affirmation that it `` confirms that it is the State of Kuwait which is prosecuting the civil action in England '' is nonsense .
I should however make clear that the `` Table of Significant Forged Documents '' in the Sheikh Fahad \ 's `` Closing Submissions on Legal Issues '' dated 2nd March 1999 includes some documents which are -LRB- on Mr Betts \ 's evidence -RRB- clearly not forged , such as Mr Robinson \ 's memorandum dated 27th May 1988 and Mr Betts \ 's memorandum dated 31st May 1988 , both relating to the Croesus transaction .
The further table at tab 2 of `` Documents where the authenticity is in dispute '' has also been compiled incompetently - for example , quite apart from duplication , it includes documents which were provided by Mr Robinson to and used in the reports dated 8th and 9th July 1998 of the hand-writing expert , Dr Audrey Giles , as genuine `` comparison material '' -LRB- cf pages 4-9 and 53-58 -RRB- and other documents which are not forged -LRB- cf pages 31 , 33 and 34 -RRB- .
There was -LRB- and so far as I am aware remains -RRB- no realistic prospect or risk of Sheikh Fahad returning to Kuwait , still less of his facing any criminal penalty there as a result of giving information or evidence about the KIO in the course of defending himself in the English proceedings before me .
Various defendants have , prior to and during these proceedings , given various explanations for the transactions which would if correct mean that these were entered into in the interests of GT and THL and/or of the KIO and the State of Kuwait , even though they or certain aspects of them may also have involved infringement of Spanish exchange control , evasion of Spanish tax and \ ` complementary \ ' payments of a possibly questionable nature .
Foreigners dealing with Spanish concerns , including officers of the KIO like Mr Robinson , were ready to fall in with Spanish practice , comforting themselves with the thought that it was none of their business what the Spanish implications might be .
Mr Nigel Black in a memorandum dated 14th July 1989 recorded that on a visit to Spain he had been given three invoices for legal bills in respect of the Cartera Central operation , one for Ptas .50 m payable to Mr Folchi \ 's firm at a Barcelona account , one for Ptas .15.3 m to a second law firm , payable at a Madrid account , and a third for Ptas .220 m payable simply to a numbered account at Lombard Odier , Geneva , which Mr Nigel Black noted was in fact for services rendered by the same second law firm .
IV .2 -LRB- b -RRB- Croesus The letter sent by Mr de la Rosa and initialled by Mr Jaffar in about May 1988 suggested that `` the utmost urgency '' attached to the payment of $ 27.4 m for the unspecific services to which it referred .
Mr de la Rosa pleads that the payment was requested on Mr Jaffar \ 's instructions `` in order to make a payment to the Panamanian company , Horowitz Corporation , the agent for which is the law firm , Arias Fabrega & Fabrega , calle 50 , Panama '' , this being `` a complimentary payment by KIO to one of the vendors of land at Plaza de Castilla in Madrid which KIO was purchasing '' .
In an interlocutory affirmation and correspondence , Mr de la Rosa also asserted that this payment was based on a contract signed in May 1988 by Mr Jaffar for the KIO and representatives of the vendors .
During 1986 the KIO through GSM Securities Management AG -LRB- `` GSM '' -RRB- acquired a stake in Spain \ 's then largest bank , Banco Central .
In early 1989 , because of continuing Bank of Spain resistance to the KIO \ 's involvement , Koolmees sold its shares in Cartera Central for Ptas .42 b , payable by the Conycon and Gruycsa promissory notes guaranteed by banks and mentioned in section II .1 .
According to an audit letter dated 17th May 1990 written by Touche Ross Nederland to Koolmees and the KIO : `` On 7 January 1988 Koolmees paid Ptas .5,181,009,909 via Banco Zaragozano and Ptas .
Mr de la Rosa in an interlocutory affidavit dealing with his alleged knowledge of Croesus produced - without confirming - some press material associating Mr Sarasola with Horowitz Corporation and with alleged services relating to Plaza de Castilla .
Further , I note that Mr de la Rosa was ready enough , when interviewed on 19th October 1992 , to acknowledge the making of complementary payments outside Spain in respect of the Diagonal site , but offered no help on the Croesus and Oakthorn transactions .
There is no positive evidence to suggest that the payment away of $ 27.4 m in May 1988 served any purpose of either GT or indeed the KIO , and no apparent reason why there should have been two separate complementary payments -LRB- to Horowitz and Bigley -RRB- in respect of the same transaction .
IV .2 -LRB- c -RRB- Oakthorn 1 Mr Jaffar pleaded and alleged that this payment was made partly to enable the plaintiffs to acquire shares of a sugar company , Ebro , Compania de Azucares y Alcoholes S.A. -LRB- `` Ebro '' -RRB- , and that part of it went in that context to the sellers of the shares , while another part went to `` various politicians and civil servants in connection with the takeover '' .
Ebro was , once acquired , to be merged with another company , Compania de Industrias Agricolas S.A. -LRB- `` Agricolas '' -RRB- , to form Ebro Agricolas S.A. and it was necessary to keep the payments secret from other shareholders and from the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture .
The $ 7.5 m -LRB- which , until Juge Tappolet \ 's documents showed otherwise , was all that Mr Jaffar admitted receiving himself -RRB- was , he pleaded , commission or bonus agreed in respect of his successful efforts in relation to the acquisition and disposal of a stake of 11.5 % of the shares of British Petroleum at a profit to the KIO and/or Kuwait Petroleum Corporation of approximately $ 750m .
Mr Soler said that he was informed by Mr Nunez , probably around July 1989 , that THL was lending $ 55m to Oakthorn to make a confidential payment relating to Ebro , which had been acquired by GT about a year previously .
Mr Folchi in his November 1992 memorandum and his first witness statement , seemed clearly to suggest that the arrangements made with Mr Russell for the Castle Trust and Oakthorn took place in the express context of a request by Mr Robinson to establish an offshore structure to enable complementary payments to be made in relation to Ebro .
In his November 1992 memorandum , Mr Folchi described the destination of the payments as -LRB- a -RRB- $ 37.5 m paid to external accounts , -LRB- b -RRB- $ 7.5 m also paid to external accounts `` in connection with an operation in Kuwait , the details of which were not given to me by Mr Ball '' , -LRB- c -RRB- $ 3m paid direct to the KIO -LRB- i.e .
the part repayment of Kokmeeuw in the Croesus transaction -RRB- , -LRB- d -RRB- `` $ 5m paid to Bankers Trust as a complementary payment for the takeover of Ebro , according to my information '' and -LRB- e -RRB- $ 2m `` applied to expenses in this and subsequently envisaged operations '' .
I consider below Mr Jaffar \ 's suggestion that the $ 7.5 m represented entitlement to a bonus or commission in respect of BP , which others chose , unbeknown to him , to arranged to settle out of the Oakthorn 1 payment .
IV .2 -LRB- d -RRB- Oakthorn 2 Mr Soler said in his witness statement and evidence that Mr Nunez told him in June 1990 that GT needed to make a further confidential payment in relation to the merger of Ebro and Agricolas , that a further loan was to be made by THL to Oakthorn for the purpose and that GT or the KIO would put Oakthorn in funds in due course to enable Oakthorn to repay THL .
There is nothing to show or suggest that any of the payments totalling $ 50m made in respect of Oakthorn 2 was actually made as or used for complementary payments in relation to Ebro or its merger with Agricolas , or for any other purpose which might be said to be connected with GT or the KIO .
Mr Jaffar has claimed that he received the $ 10m from GT and/or the KIO as partial repayment of sums paid or to be paid by him for their account in connection with the Hammarstone transaction -LRB- section IV .2 -LRB- f -RRB- below -RRB- .
The $ 13m and $ 2.49 m went indirectly to Mr de la Rosa \ 's Stuart account 130900 at Bankers Trust , the $ 13m being immediately transferred to Stuart account 130670 .
Over the next six months , until 11th March 1988 , a 22.5 % holding of BP shares was built up in the name of the KIO .
Mr Jaffar negotiated for sale of part of the holding to Pennzoil Inc. -LRB- `` Pennzoil '' -RRB- , and entered into an agreement for such a sale , under which the KIO had the right to approach other purchasers for 21 days , subject to Pennzoil \ 's right to match any offer so obtained .
Mr Jaffar then negotiated and on 20th December 1988 agreed with BP for BP to purchase from the KIO 11.5 % of BP \ 's shares at a price which yielded the KIO a profit of around $ 750m on those shares .
In his points of defence served 22nd December 1995 Sheikh Fahad alleged -LRB- a -RRB- that the $ 22.5 m paid to him in June 1990 was a bonus payment in connection with the BP transaction , paid pursuant to approval given by the Board of the KIO at a meeting in Kuwait in late 1987 or early 1988 , and -LRB- b -RRB- that he had no knowledge that it came from the Oakthorn 2 transaction or from the plaintiffs .
He also asserted that Sheikh Ali Khalifa informed the Board of the KIA of the decision without objection in late 1987 or early 1988 ; that in about October 1988 Sheikh Ali Khalifa told Sheikh Fahad in London that the total of the bonuses to be paid in respect of BP should be $ 50m ; that in April or May 1990 Sheikh Ali Khalifa , by now Minister of Finance and Chairman of the KIA , further informed Sheikh Fahad that his bonus should now be paid and that it would be in the region of $ 20m and that Sheikh Ali Khalifa would arrange for Mr Ball to make the payment ; and that shortly after this the $ 22.5 m was received by Sheikh Fahad .
One suggestion which Mr Jaffar made , prior to his withdrawal from further participation in the trial , was that the KIO shareholding in BP was built up using money from the Kuwait Petroleum Company -LRB- `` KPC '' -RRB- ; that it was appreciated that any KPC holding would not attract the same immunity from taxation as a KIO holding ; and that the bonus was to induce Mr Jaffar \ 's assistance in , and overcome any compunctions on his part about , a delicate and risky situation which might have threatened his continued residence in this country .
If the KIO , KIA or Ministry of Oil had wished to pay any such bonuses , no obvious reason exists why this should have been done or covered up in the way suggested involving GT and THL .
That Mr Ball should arrange for payment of Sheikh Fahad \ 's and Mr Jaffar \ 's bonuses out of , respectively , the Oakthorn 2 and Oakthorn 1 monies , without either Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar having any idea that this was the source of their bonuses , would anyway be difficult to credit .
In the circumstances , it is unnecessary for me to reach or express any view about the source of the funds used for the BP transaction , the basis on which the stake in BP was acquired in the KIO \ 's name or the UK tax position .
Even if one were to assume - and I make it clear that I reach no such conclusion - that shares held in the KIO \ 's name were in reality acquired for the KPC , I am quite satisfied that this did not lead to any agreement for or payment of any bonus to either Mr Jaffar or Sheikh Fahad .
The Hammarstone transaction As pleaded by Mr Jaffar , in early 1990 Hammarstone Holdings N.V. -LRB- `` Hammarstone Holdings '' -RRB- acted on behalf of GT and the KIO in acquiring shares in Prima Immobiliaria S.A. -LRB- `` Prima '' -RRB- , and to do so borrowed the Deutschmark equivalent of Ptas .10.2 b , secured by a cash deposit of $ 14m .
According to Mr Jaffar \ 's pleading , at the request of Mr de la Rosa for GT and Sheikh Fahad for the KIO , he arranged for the Jakhal Foundation to put up $ 12.8 m of this deposit on 15th February 1990 , on terms that GT and/or the KIO would reimburse him , and used for this purpose inter alia the $ 7.5 m paid to him -LRB- on his case as BP `` bonus '' -RRB- under Oakthorn 1 .
The $ 10m received out of Oakthorn 2 was pleaded as received in partial reimbursement of outgoings for the account of GT and/or the KIO , and Mr Jaffar counter-claimed against GT and/or the KIO to the extent that he remained allegedly out of pocket .
As an explanation for the past receipt of monies , however , Mr Jaffar must have regarded the Hammarstone transaction as exhausted , because he did not invoke it when during the trial there were , for the first time , discovered -LRB- a -RRB- Dorset Corporation \ 's receipt of the additional $ 15m out of Oakthorn 1 and -LRB- b -RRB- Jakhal Foundation \ 's receipt of a further $ 1m and Dorset Corporation \ 's receipt of a further $ 7m out of Stuart account in the Pincinco transaction in November 1990 and February 1991 .
Mr Coll said that , when he became involved around the end of 1990 , Mr de Mir explained that payments connected with the occupation of Kuwait had been channelled through GT , and referred him for further information to Mr Folchi who confirmed this .
Mr Soler said that one or more of Mr de la Rosa , Mr de Mir and Mr Nunez told him , in September 1990 in relation to the additional Ptas .40 b loan to GT , that Ptas .30 b for war payments while Ptas .10 b was to cover THL \ 's debt to Banco Santander in respect of the Croesus and Oakthorn 1 operations , although in the event this debt was covered by borrowing from Chase Manhattan .
Mr Betts said that during a flight to Spain with Mr de la Rosa on 10th June 1991 , Mr de la Rosa vouchsafed that Sheikh Fahad had been `` instructed to pay away '' a total of $ 420m by Sheikh Fahad on behalf of the KIO over the past two years or so .
During meetings with Mr de la Rosa , Mr de Mir , Mr Folchi and Mr Soler in Barcelona on 11th/12th June 1991 , Mr Betts was then told that some $ 120m had been advanced on Sheikh Fahad \ 's instructions in 1988 and 1989 in tranches -LRB- noted by Mr Betts as $ 25m , $ 55m and $ 40m -RRB- to shell companies in respect of GT \ 's takeover of and investment in Ebro .
Mr Betts accepted the explanation about Ebro , but was very concerned about the payment away of $ 300m .
On his return to London , he saw Sheikh Fahad on 13th June , told him what he had learned regarding the $ 300m and the $ 120m , stated that in his view the $ 300m should be set against KIO \ 's lending to GT and disclosed as a capital payment from the KIO \ 's future generations fund and indicated , finally , that he was thinking of resigning .
After taking time to think , Sheikh Fahad did not accept Mr Betts \ 's recommendation , but told him that the payment had been made on behalf of the State of Kuwait and routed through GT because of its extreme delicacy , and that Mr Betts should not discuss the issue with anyone else .
During the period of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait , the KIO was the vehicle for many payments in the interests of the State of Kuwait .
But other war payments had , so far as Mr Betts knew , been recorded as such in the KIO \ 's books .
On 18th June 1991 , Mr Folchi and Mr Coll visited London and met Mr Betts .
In the longer one , Mr de Prado purports to thank Sheikh Ali Khalifa , as Minister of Finance , for efforts made in the past few weeks `` which have been of inestimable help in clarifying the delicate political matters connected with the U.S.A. and the use of their bases so that the agreed plans could be carried out '' and for `` your latest and very sizeable contribution '' which `` has made it possible to overcome the obstacles about which we were so concerned '' .
On travelling to London , Mr Folchi showed Mr Coll one of these letters , probably the longer letter dated 10th October 1990 .
This seems likely , in view of Mr Betts \ 's notation in his day book of a `` discussion with Folchi on support operations during emergency '' , and his recollection that he was told at some point -LRB- not by Sheikh Fahad -RRB- that the $ 300m was paid in return for the Spanish government agreeing to allow refuelling in Spain of NATO bombers en route to the Gulf in breach of NATO regulations .
During Mr Folchi \ 's visit to the KIO in London , he went with Mr Betts , probably without Mr Coll , to see Sheikh Fahad .
Whenever it was mentioned , I find that Sheikh Fahad did not at any point during this whole period - at any of these meetings or in his memorandum dated 26th November 1991 - ever explain or seek to justify a substantial part of the exposure -LRB- corresponding with the $ 300m disbursed on the Pincinco operation -RRB- by making any reference , either specific or general , to political , war or other payments made on behalf of the KIO or the State of Kuwait .
Mr de Prado \ 's purported letter dated 5th March 1991 , addressed to Sheikh Al-Salem Al-Sabah , Crown Prince and Prime Minister of Kuwait and accusing Mr Al-Haroon of passing information about the KIO to Iraq , is equally bogus .
Croesus does not involve any payment to Sheikh Fahad or Mr Jaffar .
As a member of the ruling family of Kuwait , a long-standing officer and from 1984 chairman of the KIO responsible for an investment portfolio of some 30 billion dollars , he was a dominant figure within the KIO .
After Mr Ball died at the beginning of 1990 , and Mr Jaffar ceased to be general manager in March 1990 , the dominance of Sheikh Fahad \ 's position became even more marked .
Spain only represented a relatively small percentage of the KIO \ 's total investment interests - some 3-5 % according to both Mr Robinson and Sheikh Fahad in interview on 23rd October 1992 .
Nevertheless , Spain was an active area for the KIO , and one requiring continuing and increasing financial support in 1989 and 1990 .
All the indications are that Mr Jaffar was the KIO officer most closely involved .
But Sheikh Fahad would be expected to have been aware of the general nature and level of the support extended and of its general purposes , especially when -LRB- as Mr Robinson told me -RRB- Sheikh Fahad was sufficiently concerned about the KIO \ 's Spanish exposure to say that any further investments there required his authority .
But Mr Robinson gave evidence , which I accept , that , when he received GT \ 's request for payment of the $ 27.4 m to an account with Merrill Lynch Bank Suisse in May 1988 : `` I cleared my lines with Sheikh Fahad , because there had been an issue about ... continuing to make investments in Spain .
Mr Robinson cleared the payment first by putting it to Mr Jaffar who said that he would clear it with Sheikh Fahad , and then at a later date because of his concern by going to see Sheikh Fahad and specifically checking that Sheikh Fahad was happy with what had been done .
Neither Mr Betts \ 's own tame reaction to in mid-July 1990 -LRB- see section II .6 above -RRB- nor the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on 2nd August 1990 explains or dispels the adverse inference to be drawn from Sheikh Fahad \ 's conduct in July 1990 .
If , as I have concluded , the $ 27.4 m was paid away for purposes which were not THL \ 's or GT \ 's or the KIO \ 's , the position must be either that Mr de Rosa misled Sheikh Fahad , or that Sheikh Fahad knew and accepted the true position .
By that letter , Sheikh Fahad distanced himself from account G772 , claiming that he could not recall either its details or its ownership , but saying that he believed that it might be one of many accounts held in his name on behalf of the KIO and/or State of Kuwait and/or other prominent Kuwaitis .
These included a transfer -LRB- via Swiss Bank Corporation -RRB- on 12th March 1990 of \ xc2 \ xa35m -LRB- $ 8m -RRB- to National Westminster Bank plc. , for the account of Abacus Nominees .
who in turn credited it to Sheikh Fahad \ 's Esteem Settlement ; and transfers of $ 20m on 8th February 1991 to Banque Cantonale Vaudoise , Lausanne , of $ 5m to Pictet & Cie. , Geneva on 18th February 1992 and of \ xc2 \ xa35m -LRB- $ 8.65 m -RRB- on 1st April 1992 to National Westminster Bank plc in Jersey in favour of Sheikh Fahad .
These payments were all routed on these dates via a chain of accounts at different banks , first to Elystum \ 's account in New York , then to an account of Leonis Investment Ltd. at Swiss Bank Corp. in Nassau and then to Credit Suisse , Toronto for the account of Pictet Bank & Trust Ltd. , who in turn credited it to the account with them of the interestingly named Better Trust , whose trustee is Pictet Overseas Trust Corporation Ltd. of Nassau .
Sheikh Fahad must in October 1994 and at all times have known what had become of and who held the $ 135.3 m which he had moved by a devious route from Switzerland to the Bahamas in early 1993 .
The Odyssey of the sums from account G772 in Switzerland to Sheikh Fahad \ 's Better Trust in the Bahamas via New York , Nassau and Toronto tells of desire for concealment .
The overwhelming inference is that Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar agreed and were the prime movers in London of a plan to abstract and share the bulk of the monies involved in Oakthorn 1 .
I add in parenthesis that it is probably also no coincidence that Sheikh Fahad , on the only occasion that he ever visited Mr Al-Haroon \ 's office in the KIO , did so not only to override Mr Al-Haroon \ 's concerns and objections with regard to the cession of Spanish Treasury bills which funded Oakthorn 1 , but also to order him to add his signature to Mr Betts \ 's on the relevant stock-lending agreement .
Mr Russell on Oakthorn letter paper faxed Chemical Bank regarding the transfer on 13th June and Chemical Bank responded on the same day that they had advised the customer of the receipt of funds .
He clearly lied when he told Mr Betts that the payment `` had been made on behalf of the State of Kuwait and that , because of its extreme sensitivity , it had been routed through GT '' , adding the telling instruction that Mr Betts should not discuss this issue with anyone else .
As general manager in charge of the direct investment department , Mr Jaffar had a significant and , according to Mr Betts , close interest in the KIO \ 's Spanish investments through GT , even though this may well not have been his main pre-occupation .
He seemed , according to Mr Betts , to have a close relationship with Mr de la Rosa , who also travelled not infrequently to London .
During the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait , Mr Jaffar returned -LRB- on a part time basis at least -RRB- to the KIO \ 's offices .
Croesus Mr Jaffar \ 's principal involvement in Croesus was to counter-sign Mr de la Rosa \ 's undated and very generally phrased payment request for a twelve-month advance of $ 27.4 m to GT outside Spain .
Once Mr Jaffar counter-signed , others including Mr Betts and Mr Robinson were content simply to execute Mr de la Rosa \ 's request .
A year later , according to Mr Nigel Black , Mr Ball and Mr Jaffar were keen to regularise the loan by an agreement , and as recorded in Mr Black \ 's memorandum of 14th June 1989 , Mr Black asked Mr de la Rosa accordingly .
There is nothing directly linking Mr Jaffar with the Croesus `` loan '' by THL , which led eventually to the loss being borne by GT in its 1990 year of account .
Is Mr Jaffar proved to have known that the original payment in June 1988 was not in the interests of THL , GT or the KIO , and to have known that the loss was being transferred to and written off by GT in its 1990 year of account .
Oakthorn 1 Juge Tappolet \ 's documents showed that Mr Jaffar received not simply the $ 7.5 m in Jakhal Foundation which he sought to explain as BP bonus , but a further $ 15m in Dorset Corporation , where it remained for some time travelling on and off deposit , before part of it -LRB- $ 5m -RRB- was transferred at the end of September 1989 to Barclays Bank , London .
The identical amounts received by Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar out of Oakthorn 1 , at a time when they were the KIO \ 's two most powerful officers , match their equal responsibility for a transaction by which , in my judgment , they dishonestly helped themselves to others \ ' monies .
Oakthorn 2 Mr Jaffar had by now left the KIO .
Pincinco Mr Jaffar received three separate sums from Pincinco : -LRB- i -RRB- $ 4m in Jakhal Corporation , which the plaintiffs pleaded against him at the end of 1997 and which he then sought to explain as a Hammarstone repayment ; -LRB- ii -RRB- $ 1m on 20th November 1990 from the Stuart account , which was revealed by Juge Tappolet \ 's documentation and which Mr Jaffar said in his 33rd affirmation sworn 27th November 1998 that he could only assume was another Hammarstone payment which he had previously failed to credit ; and -LRB- iii -RRB- a further $ 7m transferred into his Dorset Corporation account from Bankers Trust -LRB- again in fact out of the Stuart account -RRB- on 19th February 1991 .
Mr Jaffar was by October 1990 back , at least part time , within the KIO .
I conclude in relation to Mr Jaffar is that he too was a knowing party with others to fraudulent schemes to misappropriate the monies involved in each of the Croesus , Oakthorn 1 and 2 and Pincinco transactions .
He asserted , in relation to the payment of $ 27.4 m to Merrill Lynch Bank Suisse account 60810379 -LRB- sub-a/c 261319 -RRB- , that he had `` no means of knowing any additional details of what has become of the money after it passed to accounts that are completely out of my control , except ... '' that the payment had been made -LRB- as he asserted -RRB- in accordance with a contract between the KIO and Conycon and that `` repayments in Merrill Lynch had been made in accordance with instructions of the sells -LSB- sic -RSB- of the land site at Plaza Castilla '' .
In October 1989 he paid $ 2,576,707 out of his Stuart account to Kokmeeuw as interest -LRB- explaining in a letter to the plaintiffs \ ' solicitors dated 29th March 1996 that the KIO needed the payment for audit purposes -RRB- , and was reimbursed through THL out of monies remitted by GT .
In December 1990 , when the Coll scheme was at its inception , Mr Coll drafted for the KIO to sign two letters dated 20th December 1990 addressed to Mr de la Rosa .
One was to confirm that the loans advanced to Croesus and Oakthorn were advanced in accordance with the KIO \ 's instructions , that they could be written off in GT \ 's accounts and that `` part of the premium in the forthcoming capitalisation is a payment on behalf of the above mentioned companies to cover the outstanding loans ... '' .
The $ 5m which Mr de la Rosa suggests went to a lawyer identified by Mr Folchi as Mr Hermosilla , stayed in Mr de la Rosa \ 's Stuart accounts throughout the six months for which banking documentation is now available -LRB- section IV .2 -LRB- c -RRB- above -RRB- .
In Oakthorn 2 , Mr de la Rosa was involved in setting up the Treasury bill facility whereby the KIO put GT in funds out of which the payments were made to THL and then Oakthorn , and so on to Sheikh Fahad -LRB- $ 22.5 m -RRB- , Mr Jaffar -LRB- $ 10m -RRB- and Mr de la Rosa via Allsports -LRB- $ 15.49 m -RRB- .
The re-routing of his own payment on 12th/13th June 1990 , so that instead of going direct from Oakthorn to account Stuart , it went via Allsports , a British Virgin Islands company specially acquired by Oakthorn for the purpose , must have taken place on his instructions .
He was behind the movement of the proceeds from GT to THL in Switzerland , and the development , with advice from Mr Folchi , of the idea of a deposit with Bankers Trust , which would be charged to secure a loan to an offshore company , out of which , according to Mr Folchi , Mr de la Rosa explained that Kuwaiti war payments would be made .
IV .3 -LRB- d -RRB- Sheikh Khaled Sheikh Khaled admitted that he was `` probably '' aware that the KIO was , through Koolmees , making available very large financial support - Ptas .
I have described in section II .4 how sums totalling $ 20m were paid in instalments out of Pincinco \ 's account with Bankers Trust into general client accounts maintained by Mr Oberson at UBS -LRB- through which $ 18m passed -RRB- and SBS -LRB- through which the remaining $ 2m passed -RRB- .
Instructions for the payments from Pincinco to Mr Oberson \ 's accounts were given by Mr Folchi and Mr Russell to Bankers Trust in Geneva on 2nd October 1990 .
On 28th September 1990 Sheikh Khaled passed details of two London and Jersey banks to his Swiss adviser , Mr Dawson .
On 1st October 1990 Mr Dawson instructed Mr Oberson that he would be receiving into his client account at UBS two tranches of $ 1m on 2nd and 5th October 1990 , and that these should be split between four banks , including the two which Sheikh Khaled had communicated to him on 28th September 1990 .
On 3rd October 1990 , Sheikh Khaled gave instructions to Mr Oberson how to pay monies to Sheikh Khaled \ 's Abacus account in Jersey .
From Mr Oberson \ 's accounts a total of $ 9m passed between 9th October 1990 and 6th February 1991 , in instalments of between $ 500,000 and $ 2.5 m , to the Jersey account held by Abacus Nominees on behalf of Sheikh Khaled ; further sums totalling in each case $ 4.5 m were passed in instalments of between $ 250,000 and $ 1.25 m over a like period to each of the fifty-fifth and fifty-sixth defendants , Simul and Semper S.A. -LRB- `` Simul '' -RRB- and Simill Modo S.A. -LRB- `` Simill '' -RRB- , Panamanian companies established for Sheikh Khaled \ 's benefit ; and the final $ 2m was passed in two instalments each of $ 1m on about 26th October and 7th December 1990 to Paul Dawson \ 's own account maintained under the code-name of Alice \ 's Restaurant .
Paul Dawson , the son of the KIO \ 's former general manager Bruce Dawson , was a financial adviser to Sheikh Khaled based in Switzerland .
Sheikh Khaled , Paul Dawson and Mr Oberson met in Geneva on 12th December 1989 and 1st February 1990 , and developed proposals whereby , to ensure complete confidentiality , Paul Dawson \ 's name `` should be used for all ostensible purposes '' , funds could be paid via Mr Oberson \ 's accounts and twin Panamanian companies would be set up for Sheikh Khaled \ 's benefit .
Sheikh Khaled told Mr Dawson that the reason for the proposals was that he expected to receive monies from Kuwait .
It came to light then only as a result of independent action taken by Abacus Nominees in applying to the Jersey court -LRB- see below -RRB- .
In paragraph 3 he said that the $ 9m received into the Abacus account `` came from monies held by Oberson Thiebaud in Switzerland in an account on behalf of Paul Dawson .
Upon hearing that the monies would be paid to me in October I spoke to Mr Paul Dawson about the matter and asked him to let me know the details of the account of Oberson Thiebaud in Geneva .
In his points of defence , served 3rd January 1996 and amended several times over the next years , Sheikh Khaled admitted the transfers to Sheikh Khaled \ 's account at Abacus Nominees , to the fifty-fifth and fifty-sixth defendants and to Alice \ 's Restaurant but denied they represented monies which had been transferred from Pincinco or that Sheikh Khaled knew , believed or had any reasonable grounds to believe that they did .
He said that after his promotion to deputy general manager at the beginning of 1990 , Mr de la Rosa began to pay him more attention , dropping into his office for a chat when in London for meetings with Sheikh Fahad or Mr Ball .
Sheikh Khaled \ 's instructions to Mr Dawson regarding payment to Abacus Nominees are documented in the form of a fax message dated 3rd October 1990 .
In evidence , Sheikh Khaled said that the original intention had been to remit the whole $ 18 million to the Panamanian companies , but that unidentified needs for money for family purposes led to the decision -LRB- on this basis presumably made in about early October 1990 -RRB- to send half to Abacus .
His witness statement went on that , later , at the end of 1992 , Mr Paul Dawson `` pleaded for more money , claiming that his costs of making the investments had been higher than he had anticipated '' and Sheikh Khaled paid him additional sums of $ 75,000 and SF150 ,000 .
He dealt with Mr Ian Fair of Mees Pierson in the Bahamas in relation to monies in trust , and had intended to ask him to remit some monies to Switzerland , but never in fact did so .
As to the monies which went to Mr Paul Dawson , the 10 % was not just for Mr Dawson to manage and administer and give investment proposals `` because he did not want to be involved in that , and to take time and to be ... the headache of it '' , but also to compensate for previous work which Mr Dawson had done on top .
Sheikh Khaled said that he had no document , note or communication referring to the transaction which Mr de la Rosa had introduced .
Sheikh Khaled was relatively young when he was appointed to the high offices which he held within the KIO .
Sheikh Khaled said to me that , during this time , all his efforts were devoted to saving Kuwait , and described to me his wide-ranging responsibilities and activities .
Scott. , a KIO investment manager in 1992 , spoke of Sheikh Khaled being put in a position beyond his experience during the Iraqi crisis , and Mr Meinertzhagen , a partner in Hoare & Co. with whom Sheikh Khaled worked on a disposal of Midland Bank shares in 1992 , spoke of his lack of experience or training in the context of so large a transaction , and of his straightforward and honourable appearance .
Mr Dorrance , a former director and substantial private investor , with Campbell Soup Company and a friend of Sheikh Khaled \ 's , attests to the extent that Sheikh Khaled relies heavily on trust , to his correctness and to the absence of any cause to doubt his integrity .
Mr Betts \ 's experience of Sheikh Khaled , at the KIO and when working for him , led him to regard Sheikh Khaled as `` extremely trusting , and at times naive '' .
In his oral evidence , Mr Betts said that his understanding of the deal was that Sheikh Khaled was involved in the underwriting in Spain of a share issue which was a success .
He went on to commence a masters degree in international relations in London , before joining the KIO as a trainee -LRB- later giving up the degree course on the basis that the additional qualification would not be regarded by the KIO as particularly valuable -RRB- .
Further , Sheikh Khaled \ 's position within the KIO and his responsibilities , especially during the invasion , his awareness of the huge financial support -LRB- Ptas .120 b -RRB- made available to GT through Koolmees in the summer and autumn 1990 , and his signature of the relevant authorisation and instructions at Mr Betts \ 's request , may well have meant that other conspirators would have felt that they either needed or should ensure his co-operation or agreement .
Mr McGhee for Sheikh Khaled invited me to consider the possibility that Sheikh Khaled may have been given $ 20 million out of Pincinco , to buttress Mr de la Rosa \ 's reputation in the eyes of Sheikh Khaled and/or to secure Sheikh Khaled \ 's goodwill in case Mr Al-Haroon should continue troublesome and/or to secure a \ ` hold \ ' over Sheikh Khaled -LRB- who could later himself be shown to have received money from a dubious source -RRB- in case anyone should at any time seem about to investigate or discover the Pincinco fraud .
So devious a plot pre-supposes on any view that Sheikh Khaled was seen as having greater significance within the KIO than some other submissions made on his behalf assert .
First , I have recounted in section II .7 how , after the KIO first made general allegations of misappropriations -LRB- though before they embraced any monies flowing to Sheikh Khaled -RRB- , Sheikh Khaled was in December 1992/January 1993 prepared to fund Mr de la Rosa and Mr Folchi with $ 2 million each , against Sheikh Fahad \ 's guarantee of repayment .
Chronologically , these loans followed the meeting of September 1992 at Mr Jaffars \ ' house between Sheikhs Fahad and Khaled , Mr Jaffar and Mr Folchi , although no direct request for monies appears at that point to have been addressed to Sheikh Khaled at all , and he appears to have lent the monies he did at Mr de la Rosa \ 's insistence .
I also allow for the fact that , when Sheikh Khaled left the KIO in January 1993 , Sheikh Fahad assisted him with the expenses of setting up an office at Love Lane , so that there is that element of mutual generosity .
Sheikh Khaled \ 's evidence was that , in about December 1994 , Mr Paul Dawson gave him the news that Baker & McKenzie were asking Mr Oberson about a $ 2 million `` hole '' in the KIO \ 's assets said to represent monies which had gone into Mr Oberson \ 's bank account , and that Mr Dawson told Sheikh Khaled that this was `` part of the US$ 20 million '' in fact received from Mr de la Rosa .
-LRB- Sheikh Khaled said that Mr Dawson did not actually know that the source of the $ 20 million was Mr de la Rosa .
Sheikh Khaled \ 's witness statement said that he was `` horrified and panic stricken '' to hear this , that Mr Paul Dawson then suggested that , if he were to fill the missing hole and pay Mr Oberson an additional $ 500,000 for all the work he had been doing and the legal fees he had incurred in London , it would keep Sheikh Khaled out of the present action , and that , desperate not to be involved , he made available from his own funds $ 500,000 and , from his family \ 's Jersey trusts with his family \ 's consent , another $ 2 million .
Mr Oberson in fact received advice from Herbert Smith which aborted this particular scheme , on the grounds that it could mislead the English court , and monies were eventually returned by Mr Oberson to Mr Paul Dawson .
These applications were , in the event , overtaken by other developments , since on 16th February 1995 the plaintiffs \ ' solicitors were told by Allen & Overy , solicitors to Abacus Nominees , that Abacus Nominees was responsible not only for Sheikh Fahad \ 's previously disclosed Jersey trusts , but also for various Jersey trusts and companies of Sheikh Khaled , and that they had in relation to the latter sought of their own motion -LRB- following , it appears , some contact made with them by Mr Oberson on 7th February 1995 -RRB- an order of the Royal Court of Jersey dated 13th February 1995 in order to `` ensure that the interests of any person who may have a legitimate claim to assets which have been in our clients \ ' possession or which are administered by our clients , are not thwarted , so far as our client is able so to do '' .
Allen & Overy \ 's letter dated 16th February 1995 disclosing this order also revealed to the plaintiffs that , in addition to the $ 2m about they already knew , Mr Oberson \ 's client account had received the further $ 18m from Pincinco on behalf of Paul Dawson , of which $ 9m had gone to the Abacus Nominees account held for Sheikh Khaled , with the balance going to Simul , Simill and Alice \ 's Restaurant .
There seems also to be force in Mr Soler \ 's point that no reason appears for remitting monies for Llotasa to Andorra , and then via Wentland to Spain .
At other points , however , he was at pains to emphasise that he -LRB- in common with Mr Betts as treasurer of the KIO -RRB- did not regard it as part of his instructions to check their rationale , and only had oversight of GT \ 's bank accounts and payments in Spain .
A letter ostensibly signed by Mr Jaffar dated 2nd September 1988 acknowledging and authorising them can be seen to be a forgery , using KIO letter paper with the `` 071 '' dialling code which only came into use in May 1990 .
The instructions he received came usually from Mr Nunez or Mr de Mir .
Prior to about June 1991 Mr Soler \ 's only contact with the KIO in London would be through Quail , thereafter he had direct contact .
Croesus In respect of the Croesus operation , Mr Soler \ 's involvement began , he said in his witness statement , with Mr de Mir telling him that Kokmeeuw had made an advance to GT for confidential purposes related to the Cartera Central transaction , that GT was now going to repay this advance out of a loan arranged from Banco Santander \ 's Madrid branch , and that Mr Soler should -LRB- as he did -RRB- go to Madrid to execute the loan .
According to Mr Soler , Mr de Mir also said that , since the original payment had been confidential , the repayment should be through an intermediary and that Mr Nunez said that GT or the KIO would later put the intermediary in funds to repay the loan .
Later in October 1989 , Mr Soler said , Mr de Mir showed him the fax which Mr Black addressed to him dated 10th October 1989 , identifying the amount of $ 2,576,707 as outstanding at 10th October 1989 , asked him to send money to enable THL to pay this sum to Kokmeeuw and said that Mr Coll would provide a receipt .
I regard as more than a little fanciful Mr Soler \ 's suggestions both that it was because the KIO might wish , for a period , to keep out of its accounts an item which it could not explain , and that he understood that the later writing off of the Croesus and Oakthorn loans in GT \ 's 1990 accounts was intended to be in lieu of repayment of the loans by the KIO .
Despite his suggestion -LRB- which I have rejected -RRB- that he thought that Croesus would eventually be put in funds to repay by GT or the KIO , Mr Soler in his final submissions -LRB- paragraph 32 -LRB- c -RRB- on page 18 -RRB- also appears to accept this , at least as representing the short-term accounting position .
It was only on 14th June 1992 that Mr Nunez signed such a guarantee -LRB- and only on 25th June 1992 that Mr Coll sent it to THL -RRB- .
The memorandum sets out to explain all the transactions , in the case of Croesus on the basis that it had been used to pay a premium to `` Z. S.A. '' for Ebro shares sold to GT under a public offer in April 1988 .
Oakthorn 1 Mr Soler \ 's witness statement said that he was told in September 1989 by Mr Nunez that a confidential payment had been made in connection with the Ebro takeover , that the mechanism was the Oakthorn loan and that this would be repaid by GT or the KIO .
The plaintiffs suggest -LRB- a -RRB- that Mr Soler can not be believed when he says that Mr Nunez gave him or he believed any explanation about Ebro , and -LRB- b -RRB- that he can not have been told or believed that Oakthorn would repay .
Pincinco According to his witness statement , first Mr Nunez and then on 3rd October 1990 Mr Folchi told him that funds were being sent by the KIO to GT , ostensibly as a loan , for war payments to be made on the KIO \ 's behalf .
Mr Soler said that his understanding of this extra $ 100m was that it was destined to repay Banco Santander in respect of the loans by which Croesus and Oakthorn 1 and 2 were funded ; but that in fact these Banco Santander loans were repaid , using the same security , out of borrowings from Chase Manhattan .
The plaintiffs also suggest that Mr Soler must have associated loans for $ 40m made to THL in the name of Wantley in December 1990 with the Stuart account at Bankers Trust , Geneva into which Pincinco monies were paid .
Wantley was just a Gibraltar facade provided by Mr Coll .
The banking documents show that Mr de la Rosa and Mr de Mir gave the instructions to debit account Stuart , and that they were implemented by advice to THL simply showing monies coming from `` one of our clients '' .
He addressed the repayment to the account of THL at Bankers Trust , attention Mr Yves Byrde , and Mr Byrde received unknown instructions to credit it to account Stuart .
The Ptas .25 m confirms that Mr de la Rosa , Mr Nunez and Mr de Mir were prepared to overpay Mr Soler for smooth and compliant service , but does not establish impropriety on Mr Soler \ 's part .
The KIO delegation , which spent the week prior to 26th May in Spain on a fact-finding mission , tried deliberately to appear moderate and co-operative with existing management , and had numerous meetings with GT , its subsidiaries and Mr de la Rosa .
IV .3 -LRB- f -RRB- Mr Coll Mr Coll is , as indicated in section I. 3 , well qualified , with a United Kingdom university education and professional accountancy qualifications in England and Spain .
Mr Coll evidently also had a very high sense of his own financial worth , something for which Mr de la Rosa was at the time well able to cater , using others \ ' monies .
Mr Coll said in evidence that , according to his recollection , in September 1989 Mr Soler asked him to speak to Mr de Mir , who told him in general terms that a very confidential payment was going shortly to be made in connection with reorganisation of the group or mergers , that Mr de Mir did not want to give more information because of the risk of price movements and that GT \ 's board would in due course approve it ; and that , in these circumstances , Mr Coll agreed to make Croesus available as an intermediary and , if required , to channel the funds to the ultimate destination .
He either remembered or speculated that the Barcelona accounts department and/or Mr Curton in THL , London only got round to it then .
I think it unlikely that any reference to Croesus and any approach to Mr Coll took place before about March 1990 , and probable that the approach then made was in the context of the audit work under way in respect of THL \ 's 1989 year of account .
On Mr Coll \ 's case , he was also told , at or about the time he first spoke to Mr de Mir , that GT would approve the Croesus loan .
There is in existence a purported board minute dated 13th December 1989 , point 12 of which purports to approve both the Croesus and Oakthorn operations for $ 25m and $ 55m respectively , and their extension to 31st December 1990 , and goes on for good measure to say that `` It was also resolved to formalise , as soon as possible , the remaining operations agreed with Oakthorn Limited as a consequence of the transfer of promissory notes from the sale of Cartera Central for a further amount of $ 50m and this in accordance with the agreement contained in the letter of Javier de la Rosa dated June 9th .
This has the hall-marks of later concoction -LRB- though I do not mean by Mr Coll -RRB- , perhaps around mid-1990 when questions were being raised about Croesus and Oakthorn 1 .
It evidently purports to anticipate and account for all three transactions - that is Croesus , Oakthorn 1 and Oakthorn 2 -LRB- which did not occur until mid-1990 -RRB- - in a total figure of $ 130m , which the letter suggests will be paid by GT to the KIO as `` compensation and consideration '' for the KIO \ 's financial support .
When Mr Coll was first asked about the Croesus loan in November 1992 , the questions and answers proceeded on the basis that that both the loan and Mr de la Rosa \ 's letter dated 14th September 1989 were prepared on the dates they bore .
If he had any understanding that it was to reflect an advance made to Croesus in 1989 , he must have acquired it from Mr Coll , or possibly from Mr Puig or Mr Catala .
The date of the Wantley invoice shows , on any view , that Mr de Rosa and Mr de Mir were , in the course of the Croesus operation , quite capable of making a payment and leaving until a later date any arrangements for its documenting and covering up .
The auditors did not know and were not informed that Mr Coll was behind Croesus -LRB- or that Oakthorn was simply acting as a vehicle for GT -RRB- .
It is difficult to think that Mr Coll did not realise or strongly suspect that Oakthorn had been deployed in a similar manner to Croesus .
More specifically , the suggestion in the letter that Croesus or Oakthorn had been involved in the strategic reorganisation of the group was clearly inaccurate , and was in the case of Croesus and was probably in the case of Oakthorn known by Mr Coll to be such .
The plaintiffs assert that Mr Coll was also involved in false accounting in respect of the write-off of the Croesus and Oakthorn loans in GT \ 's and its group \ 's 1990 accounts .
But , even assuming that Mr Coll has lied both in his account of the timing of Croesus \ 's introduction into the picture , and in his account of the context and purpose of the Croesus loan and roll-over documentation and the Wantley invoice , it does not necessarily follow that he has lied in his account of the explanations given him .
In relation to the Croesus and Oakthorn 1 and 2 transactions , he drafted the two letters dated 20th December 1990 for signature by Sheikh Fahad for the KIO .
The scheme which Mr Coll designed was widely discussed , first in Spain with Mr de Mir and Mr de la Rosa and then by Mr Folchi and Mr Coll in London with Mr Betts .
En route to London on 18th June 1991 , Mr Folchi showed Mr Coll a copy of Mr de Prado \ 's letter to Sheikh Ali .
In London , to Mr Coll \ 's knowledge , Mr Folchi and Mr Betts discussed the scheme with Sheikh Fahad -LRB- who during the Iraqi invasion had had full power to deal with Kuwaiti assets -RRB- , and Mr Folchi told Mr Coll that he had given Sheikh Fahad a copy of Mr de Prado \ 's letter .
After their return to Spain , Sheikh Fahad wrote to Mr Betts the letter dated 20th June 1991 , which Mr Betts \ 's evidence establishes to be genuine , instructing him to cast Koolmees \ 's and Kokmeeuw \ 's votes in favour of the resolutions by which the scheme was to be implemented .
The embellishment whereby Riquel swapped the new issued shares for existing shares held by Philby , MIRA and Folma was simply to make it even more difficult to track what had happened .
Mr Coll says he understood , and devised the scheme on the basis , that it was concealment of war related payments from public eyes , particularly those of journalists and Iraqi agents , and that there was no secrecy as regards the KIO , as GT \ 's shareholders , or its officers , including the KIO \ 's chairman Sheikh Fahad and Mr Betts .
Mr Coll is I think right to say that , although he refused to give any details , his answers at page 56 in the transcript of his interview on 25th November 1992 do assert that he received extra -LRB- and authorised -RRB- remuneration through the loans to Coggia which were then covered by the price paid by GT and THL .
Mr Coll was cross-examined about a letter dated 15th January 1992 , which he admitted having had prepared , addressed by Coggia to Mr Soler at THL , purporting to record that THL owed Coggia some Ptas .119 m relating to the -LSB- GT -RSB- share purchase operation executed on December 23 , 1991 '' and going on : `` In addition as agreed with you we shall be paying 29,887,994 pesetas of expenses relating to the operation on your behalf '' .
In the letter , Coggia then asked THL to pay the total of nearly Ptas .150 m in three directions , some Ptas .83.8 m to Zymo , the Spanish notary \ 's vehicle , Ptas .62 m to Coggia -LRB- which Mr Coll explained was for a payment to Mr Folchi \ 's firm unconnected with any of the present operations -RRB- and some Ptas .3.96 m to Russell Limebeer .
More interesting , perhaps , is the fact that this letter only reached THL \ 's London office in September 1992 under cover of an envelope post-marked in Spain on 1st September 1992 , addressed to the attention of Mr Curtar -LSB- sic -RSB- at THL and bearing Mr Coll \ 's name and address on the back in writing other than his .
Mr Coll rendered assistance in respect of each of the Croesus , Oakthorn 1 and 2 and Pincinco operations .
Likewise , the assurances which Mr Coll gave in mid-1990 regarding Croesus and Oakthorn -LRB- in relation to the Oakthorn 1 transaction -RRB- did not , even where they were strictly accurate , constitute a fair answer to the auditors \ ' question , and I do not think that Mr Coll can have thought they did .
The Coll scheme which Mr Coll devised from December 1990 on provided the means by which the Croesus and Oakthorn 1 and 2 transactions -LRB- as well as the Pincinco transaction -RRB- could continue to be accounted for without attracting public attention .
The most that can be said is that Mr Coll did not disclose during such discussions that any involvement of Croesus and Oakthorn was artificial and to his knowledge in the case of Croesus backdated .
Others believed this , including Mr Betts and , so far as appeared to Mr Coll , Mr Folchi .
The purported letter dated 21st February 1988 from Mr Robinson to Mr de la Rosa also suggested that a premium of up to $ 90m was then envisaged on the Ebro transaction , although , as stated in section IV .2 -LRB- c -RRB- , the annexure of this to the memorandum was not explored before me .
In his supplemental witness statement , he said that `` sometimes in 1988 J.R. -LSB- Mr de la Rosa -RSB- instructed me about the need of a structure which could allow GT to make payments legally outside Spain '' and that this requirement was commented with Mr de la Rosa , Mr de Mir , Mr Robinson and `` very probably at least in one occasion '' with Mr Jaffar .
Mrs Parker evidently introduced Mr Folchi to Mr Russell .
She must have introduced Mr Folchi to Mr Russell before 5th September 1988 , since on that date she received Freshfields \ ' advice on the possible UK implications of her becoming a beneficiary in a Jersey trust .
Why Mr Russell should have couched a letter to Mrs Parker on 1st February 1989 which appears to reflect advice for future action remains mysterious , since it seems improbable that Mrs Parker had , in addition to Mr Folchi , another similar connection interested in Jersey off-shore structures at this time .
The letter contemplates a structure like the Sierra Trust to hold a Jersey company such as Oakthorn to receive income gross in Jersey `` unless there were any withholding tax restrictions in the country of origin '' .
On 13th June 1989 Mr Russell wrote to an English partner regarding `` a new UK company '' to be held by two companies belonging to a Jersey trust , its first -LRB- and no doubt nominal -RRB- purpose being to act as an estate agent between England and Spain and its `` principal idea '' being to receive monies without deduction of any withholding tax in the remitting country .
As to external accounts , Mr Folchi indicated when seen on 17th September 1992 that he understood the KIO to have three private external accounts , controlled by Mr Ball and Mr Jaffar , and that he had been instrumental in obtaining trading status for the KIO in Spain as a private body , rather than a governmental agency .
In his November 1992 memorandum to the Attorney General , he stated that he had no detailed knowledge of what the external accounts were , but that , at the time of his initial involvement with the KIO , Mr Ball had given him the explanation , which he had checked with Mr Jaffar , that the KIO managed both assets of the Future Generations Fund -LRB- `` FGF '' -RRB- , which were publicly owned , as well as other private Kuwaiti funds .
He suggested that the KIO had obtained significant fiscal benefits in the UK , which should not have been granted save in respect of the FGF , and had made investments in Spain which could be unlawful with `` devastating implications '' if it were to become known that the KIO only handled public funds .
In his supplemental witness statement Mr Folchi said that he `` knew that the KIO was managing external accounts in Switzerland , and precisely through Lombard Odier and Privat Bank '' , that his understanding was that `` KIO was managing public and private funds and acting through tax havens in the Netherlands Antilles , Swiss banks and other instrumental companies '' , and that it was very easy to accept that external accounts could have been involved in the Ebro takeover .
The way KIO conducted the investments in Spain was not clear , and I think I may say was far from transparent .
I am not saying that I thought I contemplated specifically this possibility in 1989 ... '' After Juge Tappolet \ 's documents became available , Mr Folchi said in his supplemental witness statement that Mr de la Rosa had , prior to the November 1992 memorandum , told him that the Privat Bank money was for the account FAIRVIEW and that the $ 5m to Bankers Trust was `` for account 101900 `` Stuart '' and -LSB- was -RSB- transferred to pay Ramon Hermosilla , a Madrid based lawyer involved in the Ebro takeover on behalf of -LSB- GT -RSB- '' .
Not only did Mr Folchi fail in his November 1992 memorandum to mention account Stuart and his awareness of Mr de la Rosa \ 's involvement in account Stuart , but the Swiss documents show Mr Folchi instructing Bankers Trust direct to credit the $ 5m to the Stuart account , so that Mr Folchi must in fact have been aware from the outset of that account \ 's involvement .
He said that Mr de la Rosa had asked him to cancel a prior Stuart account at Bank of America and to move to Bankers Trust where Mr de la Rosa also opened an account , `` because that was convenient and KIO preferred to work with Bankers Trust '' .
His `` assumption '' , Mr Folchi said , was that Mr de la Rosa was `` involved in the management of KIO external accounts in Switzerland .
They contain an example of a letter dated 22nd May 1989 written by Mr Folchi informing Bank of America that the Stuart account would shortly be credited with Ptas .38 m and saying `` I would be grateful if you could effect upon immediate receipt of these funds , the following URGENT transfer ... '' .
In 1990 three payments were on Mr Folchi \ 's instructions made to his Falcon account originating from monies left in Oakthorn \ 's account in Jersey .
Mr Folchi said that she was an old friend of his who wanted cash in Switzerland , to which country she was moving , and had cash in Spain at a time when Mr de la Rosa wanted Ptas .25 m cash there for GT operations .
The third , for $ 775,373 paid on 13th November 1990 , was , Mr Folchi told me , fees agreed with Mr de la Rosa covering -LRB- a -RRB- Oakthorn 1 and 2 , -LRB- b -RRB- Hammarstone , the Paribas loan contracts and associated put and call options and -LRB- c -RRB- a transaction involving the purchase of Urbas shares through Mr Russell .
As to -LRB- c -RRB- , Mr Russell was in mid-July 1990 instructed to transfer $ 900,000 from Oakthorn to another Russell company , Setsar Limited -LRB- the thirty-fourth defendant -RRB- , and to pass it to Madrid stockbrokers to buy Urbas shares , which were sold at a profit in November 1990 with the proceeds being transferred to the account of Setsar which then paid out of them Mr Folchi \ 's fee and further fees which Mr Folchi suggests , in a letter dated 9th March 1999 , went to a tax lawyer engaged on Oakthorn 1 .
Mr Folchi also said that he was , at some point after the board meeting , informed that `` other complementary payments would need to be made '' ; and that in June 1990 Mr Ball told him that the Oakthorn structure would again be used , and instructed him to make payments set out in Sierra Trust \ 's letter dated 7th October 1992 , counter-signed by RBS and by Mr Folchi which he produced to Mr Fordham of Stephenson Harwood at their meeting on 13th November 1992 .
Mr Folchi \ 's supplemental witness statement stated that in May 1990 he learned first from Mr de la Rosa that the KIO was prepared to give further financial support to GT , and secondly from Mr Ball that four new payments were to be made outside Spain through the mechanism of a $ 50m loan by THL to Oakthorn in connection with the Ebro-Agricolas merger .
Here , therefore , in apparent contrast with his November 1992 memorandum , Mr Folchi brackets the two complementary payments -LRB- to London and Jersey -RRB- and the two external account payments -LRB- to Zurich and , via New York , Geneva -RRB- together within the framework of that merger .
Another feature is that , in a case where the offshore advantages for complementary payments of Switzerland and tax havens have been so underlined , the larger payment described by Mr Folchi as complementary was addressed to London .
It is clear that Mr Folchi must by 22nd May 1990 already have been instructed to make the $ 22.5 m payment to the account in the name of F. M. Al-Sabah at Chemical Bank , The Strand , London .
On 29th May 1990 Mr Russell for Oakthorn wrote to Chemical Bank referring to such instructions , and asking for account details to conclude the payment rapidly , once `` some technical requirements '' were fulfilled .
Sierra Trust \ 's letter dated 7th October 1992 fails conspicuously to give the names or , at least in the first two cases , any numbers of the accounts to which were addressed the $ 22.5 m sent to Chemical Bank , London , for the attention of Kay Walsh , the $ 10m sent to Rud Blass Bank , Zurich , for the attention of Rudy Frei , and the $ 2m sent to Chemical Bank , New York in favour of C.I .
Discovery by the Sierra Trust in this action shows that Mr Russell retained Mrs Parker \ 's fax instructions dated 12th June 1990 by Mr Folchi , for payment away by Allsports of the $ 15.49 m which it received to Bankers Trust , Geneva , attention Yves Byrde , in two tranches , and Sierra Trust \ 's letter of the same date to Morgan Grenfell passing on these instructions .
It also includes undated internal summaries of Oakthorn \ 's bank account with RBS and of receipts and payments , showing Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar as recipients of the $ 22.5 m and $ 10m .
Mr Russell had been encouraged in late September 1992 to `` gather together the papers on the matters raised in the meeting '' and to meet with Mr Folchi , and they had done this in Barcelona on 4th October 1992 .
The on-payments by Allsports to the Stuart account were only discovered as a result of Norwich Pharmacal proceedings in Jersey , leading to the first affidavit sworn 12th January 1994 by Mr McSporran of Morgan Grenfell , Jersey .
Upon its arrival in Stuart account 130900 , $ 1.3 m of the $ 2.4 m was transferred to Mr Folchi \ 's account Falcon , value 20th June 1990 .
criminal proceedings in Kuwait or the countries of payment or letters rogatory from England .
The memorandum itself , read as a whole , had a clear aim , in addition to that of giving information , of persuading or warning the KIO to take the matter no further - indeed , according to Mr Folchi \ 's supplemental witness statement , its `` main function '' was to warn the Government of Kuwait about suggested risks inherent in continuing with the investigation .
In his supplemental witness statement , he said that the names of Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar gave him `` additional comfort '' : `` I was sending the money to accounts controlled by KIO \ 's top executives as it was supposed to happen with external accounts .
He had so far as appears no solid ground for thinking that private accounts were being held in Sheikh Fahad \ 's or Mr Jaffar \ 's or indeed Mr de la Rosa \ 's name but managed by the KIO , and nothing beyond speculation to suggest that monies had been expended out of such accounts for GT \ 's benefit .
Why the KIO or GT should wish THL to borrow monies in London , have them remitted to Oakthorn in Jersey , only to be returned to a bank account in Sheikh Fahad \ 's name in London is not a matter which on his account he can ever have addressed .
Pincinco According to Mr Folchi , he learned from Mr de la Rosa at or near the end of September that the purpose was to make payments away connected with the efforts to recover Kuwait , and that a Swiss bank was to be used .
On the same day , he , rather than Mr de la Rosa as at first contemplated , became a director of THL , while in Jersey Pincinco held a board meeting approving the taking of a $ 300m facility from Bankers Trust , Geneva and gave Mr Russell a power of attorney .
On 2nd October 1990 , Mr Folchi travelled with Mrs Parker to Geneva , where he met Mr Russell and had meetings and signed documentation as set out earlier in this judgment .
If Mr Folchi and Mrs Parker were in Geneva by coincidence , just when the Pincinco operation and documentation required finalising , that is a considerable coincidence , particularly since Mr Russell was there for that purpose .
Mr Schnell of Bankers Trust gave fluctuating evidence in his deposition as to whether he had contact with Mr Folchi prior to their meeting on 1st October 1990 , and had forgotten that Mr Russell was present on 1st October 1990 .
Mr Schnell said in his deposition that `` needless to say '' Bankers Trust received from the clients particulars of the purpose of the transaction , and was advised that it was the financing of the acquisition in Spain by Mr de la Rosa , whether for Kuwaiti or other investors , of the whole of part of the Spanish company Ercros .
These included the payment of -LRB- 1 -RRB- $ 75m to Lombard Odier , attention Thierry Lombard , -LRB- 2 -RRB- $ 15m to Montrex -LRB- payee of $ 2m in the Oakthorn 2 operation -RRB- , -LRB- 3 -RRB- $ 100m and Ptas .450 m to account Stuart at Bankers Trust , attention Mr Byrde and -LRB- 4 -RRB- $ 4m to Rud Blass Bank , Zurich , attention Rudy Frei .
That leaves $ 1.3 m received into his Falcon account , out of which he told me that he paid on Mr de la Rosa \ 's instructions various other fees , particularly $ 200,000 in mid-October 1990 to Mr Byrde , $ 150,000 in mid-November 1990 to an account Elixir at Lombard Odier , $ 400,000 in four instalments in December and January 1990 and March 1991 to Balkan Corporation for a Mr Guardia , for banking advice on the fiduciary deposit , Ptas .200 m -LRB- or $ 262,000 -RRB- in February 1991 to Mr Aguiar and Mr Huguet , supposedly for tax advice , and $ 470,000 on 29th January 1991 to an account L.A.I .
at Darrier & Co. , Geneva , for his partner , Mr Calderon , for work with Mr Coll -LRB- presumably at a very early stage -RRB- on the documentation which would be needed if the Coll scheme was implemented .
This suggests that Mr Aguiar \ 's and Mr Huguet \ 's roles as `` tax advisers '' may not have been unconnected with their posts in the Ministry of Finance , in Mr Aguiar \ 's case as Director General of Coordination with Territorial Inland Revenues .
Mr Folchi told me that he first learnt of the Coll scheme from Mr Coll , but was then instructed by Mr de la Rosa and/or Mr de Mir to advise and collaborate with Mr Coll on its legal and fiscal implications .
In June 1991 he visited London , where he discussed the matter with Sheikh Fahad , taking with him the forged de Prado letters and showing one to Mr Coll , as described in sections IV .2 -LRB- g -RRB- and IV .6 .
He assisted implement the Coll scheme by giving instructions to Bankers Trust leading to the replacement of the monies deposited with Bankers Trust , which had in effect been paid away to Pincinco , with the loan to Coggia .
On 30th July 1991 Bankers Trust , Zurich , sent the completed audit confirmation to THL \ 's auditors , confirming that as at 31st December 1990 THL had `` claims emanating from fiduciary deposit '' consisting of `` $ 300m for the period 4th October 1990 to 4th October 1991 with rate of interest of 8 3/16 % p.a .
Mr Coll , as scheme architect , insisted $ 3.8 m , to include the actual costs and tax liabilities of Coggia and Riquel and other companies .
The $ 6.1 m was , for unexplained reasons , paid to the Lloyds Bank , Gibraltar account of Mr Coll \ 's company , Wantley .
Mr de la Rosa said that the amounts were $ 846,903 and $ 546,018 -LRB- a total of nearly $ 1.4 m -RRB- and should be paid at bank accounts numbered respectively 83695 at Pictet Cie. , Geneva , and 188961 at Credit Suisse , Zurich .
On 13th August 1991 $ 3.1 m was then transferred , again for unexplained reasons , to an account held by another of Mr Coll \ 's companies , Goshawk Holdings Limited , at Lloyds Bank , Geneva .
In summary , he said : - \ tthat he had rendered legal services in respect of the very early stages of the CdA acquisition upon which GT resolved in October 1988 ; - \ tthat during the first months of 1989 he had been informed by Mr de la Rosa and Mr Robinson that they would need to make payments of up to $ 20m in order to ensure that the new factory was operational by the end of 1992 ; - \ tthat they asked him to then to prepare the necessary structure to allow such payment with minimum possible costs and taxes ; - \ tthat they were at this time already thinking about a structure with the proposed name Wardbase , based in the UK to take advantage of the double taxation treaty between England and Spain ; - \ tthat Wardbase was incorporated on 27th February 1989 subject to its clients \ ' instructions and under the control of Sierra Trust ; - \ tthat on 4th September 1989 the contract was signed between Torras Papel and Wardbase ; - \ tthat he was aware that reductions in costs had been made on the CdA project and was informed by Mr Nunez in early 1992 that the new plant might come on line in Spring 1992 , notably earlier than envisaged ; - \ tthat Sheikh Fahad and Mr de la Rosa then confirmed to him that , since all the agreed conditions had been met , the $ 20m should be paid ; - \ tthat `` according to instructions '' on 24th April 1992 Wardbase issued an invoice for this amount , and a total of Ptas .1.9 b was transferred to Anslow and paid onwards to an account of which Mr de la Rosa gave him details but not the name of the ultimate beneficiary , while Ptas .1 b was retained by Wardbase for costs and UK taxes ; - \ tthat both Sheikh Fahad and Mr de la Rosa informed him that the transaction was extremely confidential ; and - \ tthat his belief , in accordance with information he had been given , was that the payment would be the subject of State to State contacts , such as he had referred to when dealing with Pincinco .
He said that he had not at the time seen Mr Robinson \ 's memorandum of 15th January 1989 , and that it had only been sent him as follows : `` Years later , in 1992 , and during the process of preparing the Memorandum for the Kuwait Attorney General , DE LA ROSA sent me a copy of the Memorandum and it reminded me that in January 1989 , DE LA ROSA , ROBINSON and myself had conversations about this matter .
As to his personal involvement , he said that Mr de la Rosa , Mr de Mir and Mr Nunez had spoken to him `` at a moment which I can not specify , but which had to be before March 30th 1992 '' informing him that the factory was ready and that GT was to pay $ 20m through Wardbase to an unidentified beneficiary who had rendered services to the group in Belgium .
When preparing his memorandum of November 1992 , he said that he had no reason to mistrust and had relied on Mr de la Rosa , who had made comments about Mr Robinson \ 's and Sheikh Fahad \ 's involvement , as recounted , and had said that the payment had political implications and was enormously sensitive , to protect the identity of a lobby acting in Spain and Belgium .
Whether or not -LRB- as one may speculate -RRB- Mr Copper is a Jersey lawyer and was approached through Mr Russell , it seems probable that he also acted as a cypher , on the basis of instructions which appear to have included a draft in Spanish and must have emanated from Spain .
As regards Mrs Parker , Mr Folchi said that Mr de la Rosa , Mr de Mir and Mr Nunez all knew of Wardbase and Mr Russell and that any of them or Mr Russell himself could have instructed Mrs Parker either direct or through one of the other lawyers in his firm , such as Mr Calderon , Mr Jubert or perhaps Mr Pont , to act as she did .
Only on 25th May 1992 did she tell Mr Russell , again on instructions from a source which she said that she could not remember but which could have been one of the lawyers in her firm , that Ptas .1.9 b should be on-paid from Wardbase to Oakthorn to Anslow to account Sogenal in Geneva .
The transaction also contained one feature which was on its face obviously questionable , namely the payment of $ 5m to an account Stuart at Bankers Trust which Mr Folchi knew to have been opened by Mr de la Rosa just previously .
Until after Juge Tappolet \ 's documents became available , Mr Folchi failed to disclose that this payment went to account Stuart -LRB- despite the instructions sent in his name for its crediting to that account -RRB- or to any account connected with Mr de la Rosa and failed , until his supplemental witness statement , to mention any explanation by Mr de la Rosa of it in terms of legal fees for Mr Hermosilla .
In his November 1992 memorandum he referred to KIO external accounts controlled by Mr Ball and Mr Jaffar , but he did not mention any external account operated by Mr de la Rosa for either GT or the KIO , still less that he knew of the identity of the ultimate recipient .
On the contrary , he stated in his memorandum that his only information was that the money went to Bankers Trust as a complementary payment for the takeover of Ebro .
They were to go to accounts in the personal names of Sheikh Fahad , in his case in London , to Mr Jaffar in Switzerland , and , indirectly for the obvious purpose of obscuring the source or trail , to Mr de la Rosa \ 's Stuart account .
But the idea that the KIO would for reasons of secrecy keep accounts in the names of its chief officers , especially a London account , is on its face remarkable , and the idea that these were simply reimbursements of previous payments away in GT \ 's interests made by such officers has nothing to support it .
After the Oakthorn 2 operation , and with knowledge of Mr de la Rosa \ 's involvement in the Stuart accounts and of Mr Jaffar \ 's account at Rud Blass , an honest lawyer in Mr Folchi \ 's position , and all the more a responsible director of THL , would in my judgment have insisted on a better understanding and assurances regarding such an operation before becoming involved .
That applies in particular to his conduct -LRB- as I find it -RRB- in respect of the Pincinco deposit audit confirmation form in July 1991 , his suppression of his knowledge about the destinations or recipients of relevant payments in November 1992 , the interposition of Allsports at Mr de la Rosa \ 's request , his general suppression of his knowledge about and involvement with the Stuart and Falcon accounts and his changes of account regarding the Wardbase transaction .
Like other persons involved in this litigation , the attractions of interesting and remunerative work -LRB- in her case paid tax-free offshore in Jersey into an account with Pirunico Nominees administered for her by Mr Russell -RRB- may also have outweighed any better judgment .
Mrs Parker was able to introduce Mr Folchi to Mr Russell , because she had used the Chelmsford branch of Russell Limebeer in England .
She said , at first , that , although it was very difficult to recall , she did not think she knew who Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar , the named account-holder recipients in Oakthorn 2 , were , and , later , that she could not recall but presumed that she would have known that they were important people in the KIO , for which she knew that Mr Folchi \ 's firm was acting .
Mrs Parker was present on the first , though not the second , day in Geneva when the scheme was set up at Bankers Trust .
She herself passed instructions to Bankers Trust directly and in probability through Mr Russell for relatively minor payments or variations of payments out of Pincinco , and on 8th October 1990 she received a power of attorney formally enabling her to give such instructions on Pincinco \ 's behalf .
All these were signed by Mr Pearson , Mrs Parker \ 's husband , for Coggia and by Mr Soler for THL .
On behalf of Riquel , she signed an agreement dated 7th November 1991 to buy the 2,196,056 old shares from Philby and other companies -LRB- represented by Mr de Mir -RRB- for a supposed price of Ptas .37,332,952 and further related agreements dated 20th , 23rd and 31st December 1991 .
By further agreement dated 20th December 1991 signed by Mrs Parker for Riquel and Mr Pearson for Coggia , Riquel sold to Coggia for a supposed price of Ptas .37.322 b the 2,196,056 old shares acquired from Philby and others , and by a final agreement dated 23rd December 1991 signed by Mr Soler for THL and Mr Pearson for Coggia , Coggia sole to THL the same old shares at the same price .
She signed because Mr Coll had asked her to arrange , with the company directors of the two Dutch companies -LRB- Riquel and Coggia -RRB- , for the issue of a power of attorney to two non-Spaniards .
These instructions involved a whole further chain of payments , from Wardbase to Oakthorn to Anslow to the account of Adnil at Sogenal , Geneva , to whom Mr de la Rosa evidently asked her to send confirmation of the payment .
In an interview in January 1993 with Mr Donaldson of KPMG , he was sufficiently embarrassed to volunteer that he had paid back 90 % of the expenses he had charged to THL , although suggesting that the fact that his expense account was so high could in some way be regarded as `` a fault of the management in Spain '' .
Even the accounting by Mr Curton in London was undertaken in liaison with Spain , with Mr Soler and Mr Coll .
Three minutes of THL board resolutions at a meeting or meetings of Mr Soler and Mr Moukarzel held in Barcelona on 31st August 1989 approved borrowings of Ptas .5000 m , 15,000 m and 3000m respectively from Midland Bank plc , First National Bank of Chicago and Banco di Roma SpA .
On 27th October 1989 a Mr Lewis of THL \ 's then auditors noted a telephone conversation , in which Mr Moukarzel gave him some `` information about the structure of the borrowing to be undertaken by THL and channelled through Spain '' .
A board meeting purportedly held by Mr Moukarzel and Mr Soler in London on 15th March 1990 -LRB- but in fact conducted by telephone -RRB- , resolved to roll-over the Banco Santander loan for $ 25m , without mentioning Croesus or any onward lending .
That consists of a fax sent by Mr Max Martin of Touche Ross -LRB- THL \ 's then auditors -RRB- to Coopers & Lybrand -LRB- GT \ 's auditors -RRB- on 25th June 1990 , recording that Mr Moukarzel had informed him `` that the Croesus loan was rolled over and not repaid on 16th March 1990 '' .
In fact Mr Max Martin \ 's fax to Coopers & Lybrand of 25th June 1990 indicates that Mr Moukarzel did have some , albeit limited , involvement with Touche Ross .
In September or October 1990 Mr Moreno visited London and told Mr Moukarzel that from these monies $ 400m was to be placed at THL \ 's disposal , by implication to pay off bank indebtedness .
On 5th November 1990 the amount of \ xc2 \ xa311 ,200 was , according to the relevant transfer advice , debited to Stuart account 130900 for payment to Mr Moukarzel with no mention of sender at his London bank account -LRB- which it actually reached as a credit of \ xc2 \ xa311 ,186 -RRB- .
On 14th March 1991 a cheque for \ xc2 \ xa33000 was drawn on Mr Moukarzel \ 's Guernsey account , and on 18th March 1991 the amount of \ xc2 \ xa33000 was debited to Stuart account 130900 for payment to Mr Moukarzel with no mention of sender at that account -LRB- which it reached it as \ xc2 \ xa32992 -RRB- .
On 15th November 1990 a payment of \ xc2 \ xa315 ,000 was debited to Pincinco \ 's own account at Bankers Trust , Geneva for the credit of Mr Moukarzel \ 's London account -LRB- which it reached as \ xc2 \ xa314 ,986 -RRB- .
On 20th November 1990 a payment of \ xc2 \ xa36 ,900 was debited to Stuart account 130900 at Bankers Trust , Geneva for the credit of Mr Moukarzel \ 's London bank account -LRB- which it reached as a credit of \ xc2 \ xa36 ,886 -RRB- .
Mr Moukarzel said that he had intended his bonus to be paid offshore , on the basis that `` as a non-domicile he could save tax by having a payment paid abroad for work done abroad provided that the funds were not remitted to England '' , and had opened his Jersey account for this purpose .
The plaintiffs submit that Mr Moukarzel acted as a mere nominee on instructions received from others in Spain , whose knowledge and states of mind should therefore be attributed to him : see Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Cradock -LRB- No. 3 -RRB- -LSB- 1968 -RSB- 1 W.L.R .
1555 , 1613-4 ; Gray v. Lewis -LRB- 1873 -RRB- 8 Ch.App.Cas .1035 , 1055-6 .
Despite Mr Bailey \ 's well-presented submissions to the contrary , there is a powerful case for regarding Mr Moukarzel as acting as no more than a nominee in respect of certain aspects of the Oakthorn and Croesus operations .
The persons in question in respect of the Oakthorn and Pincinco operations are Mr Soler , directly or through Mr Moreno , Mr Jubert , probably also Mr Coll , through Mr Curton , and possibly also Mr Vasconcellos .
Croesus The plaintiffs \ ' case is that GT suffered a loss when it incurred liability to repay Kokmeeuw the $ 27.4 m transferred in May 1988 to Republic National Bank of New York for account of Merrill Lynch Bank Suisse ; alternatively when on 14th June 1988 it guaranteed repayment of the Croesus loan , in circumstances where Croesus could clearly not repay ; or finally when it credited THL on the inter-company account with the amount of the Croesus loan , and/or then wrote off Croesus and Oakthorn loans in its 1990 accounts .
The fact that other , innocent officers of the KIO or Kokmeeuw , such as Mr Betts and Mr Nigel Black , believed that the sum had been requested and paid for GT \ 's purposes would probably not have sufficed to enable Kokmeeuw to succeed against GT .
29100.50 -RRB- with its Zurich office -LRB- which , according to Mr Schnell , acted as Banker \ 's Trust \ 's `` processing office '' for Switzerland -RRB- and then credited by the Zurich office -LRB- chronological bundle p. 1545A -RRB- to Pincinco \ 's account .
The Court of Appeal refused leave to Sheikh Fahad to call Mr Lee of Lee & Allen .
He referred for example to statements in the 1990 accounts , indicating that Koolmees or the KIO `` assumed responsibility for '' the Croesus and Oakthorn '' loans .
Mr McGhee drew attention to evidence by Mr Coll , Mr Soler and Mr Folchi that they were told or understood that the Coll scheme was to compensate GT for the Croesus , Oakthorn and Pincinco operations or , in the case of Pincinco , to ensure that its cost was borne by the KIO .
Mr McGhee submitted , the position is as described by Harman J. in In re Scandinavian Bank Group plc -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 1 Ch .
Mr Coll argues that the KIO must have suffered the loss , because on 1st October 1990 it had its shareholding in GT plus a right -LRB- inter alia -RRB- to recover its $ 300m loan from GT , whereas a year later it had only the GT shareholding .
Mr McGhee referred me to In re Anglo-French Co-operation Society , ex p. Pelly -LRB- 1882 -RRB- 21 Ch.D .292 , relied on in the Court of Appeal at -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 Ll.R .
As Mr McGhee points out , ex p. Pelly concerned debentures which involved a definite liability , as well as having a market value -LRB- see per Jessel M.R .
-LRB- a -RRB- Agreement or combination : On the findings of fact which I have made , Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar and Mr de la Rosa were parties to schemes to misappropriate others \ ' monies in the Croesus , Oakthorn 1 and 2 and Pincinco transactions , and in the Pincinco transaction Sheikh Khaled joined with them .
Mr de la Rosa appears to have acted as day-to-day administrator of the transactions in Spain , using the services of experts like Mr Folchi and Mr Coll to develop ways in which they could be implemented and covered up , and issuing instructions to them and others either directly or through his close colleagues , particularly Mr de Mir and Mr Nunez .
Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar were however based at all times in London , and went rarely to Spain .
Matters were presumably discussed here on such occasions as well as by telephone between London and Spain .
Lonhro v. Fayed was a case where the unlawful act or means alleged to have harmed Lonhro consisted of false and fraudulent representations about the Fayed brothers and their company , House of Fraser , inducing the Secretary of State not to refer their bid for Harrod \ 's to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission .
Professor Villaverde was prepared to assimilate THL and GT , but Coggia in his view was in that case a person undertaking by agreement in its own name or on behalf of GT an operation -LRB- viz .
I conclude that , applying English law principles , Mr de la Rosa , Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar were all parties to conspiracies to injure GT in respect of the Croesus , Oakthorn 1 and 2 and Pincinco transactions , being joined by Sheikh Khaled in the Pincinco transaction , while Mr de la Rosa was also party to a conspiracy with others to injure GT in respect of the Wardbase transaction .
Mr McGhee for Sheikh Khaled submitted that once a court concluded that any particular transaction involved a conspiracy , there would , applying the test , have to be one single place where the whole conspiracy could be regarded as having been committed `` in substance '' .
Stafford all visited London on many occasions , they did not do so in order to organise the fraud , although they did make use of their presence in London for the practical purpose of collecting and disposing of some of the proceeds .
Apart from the initial visit to Geneva to open the accounts at BMB , directions could be given from Kuwait by telephone and fax .
The chartering which provided the occasion for fraud in \ ` Scheme I \ ' in that case took place through Clarksons in London , but it was itself undertaken for good commercial reasons , and the fraud consisted in the insertion of back-to-back sub-charters which were produced in Kuwait at different hire rates , which led to the plaintiffs -LRB- KOTC -RRB- paying more than necessary under the real charters .
The bulk of the funds generated at this stage passed through the BMB accounts in Switzerland .
\ ` Scheme III \ ' involved the interception on war risks premium rebates paid by KOTC \ 's London insurance brokers , and the damage was caused by the interception in London of funds which ought to have been transferred to Kuwait .
The fact that the object of the conspiracy was not just to steal from KOTC , but also to remove funds from Kuwait , mainly to London or Switzerland , did not seem to Moore-Bick J. of much importance , since he was `` concerned with the place where the tort was committed rather than with its object '' .
The only identified conspirators are Spanish , the plan was so far as appears conceived in Spain , it was implemented there by instructions given and transfers of the Ptas .2 b made from GT to THL and then from THL \ 's Barcelona account to Wardbase \ 's London account .
Instructions came from Spain for the subsequent paying-away of money to Oakthorn , Anslow and finally to Mr de Prado \ 's account in Geneva .
The movement of the money to London and its subsequent dispersal offshore are incapable of affecting the conclusion that the whole substance of this tort was committed in Spain .
Taking first Croesus , there must have been underlying agreement on the initial stage involving Kokmeeuw , reached between Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar in England and Mr de la Rosa either in Spain or quite likely on one of his frequent visits to London .
When it came to repayment to Kokmeeuw in London , THL was used as the vehicle , on instructions channelled to it from Spain .
The covering-up of THL \ 's payments to Kokmeuuw involved both the Wantley invoice and the backdated Croesus loan agreements , both devised by Mr Coll on instructions received in Spain , Wantley and Croesus being Mr Coll \ 's Gibraltarian creatures .
GT \ 's guarantee to THL in respect of the Croesus loan in June 1990 , its crediting of THL in inter-company account and its writing off of the loan in its 1990 accounts , which together had the effect of transferring THL \ 's loss to GT , all occurred in Spain .
Although even at its initial stage GT was involved as an ostensible borrower , the Croesus transaction started as a fraud on Kokmeeuw in London benefiting a Spanish citizen in Switzerland .
But , from at least the time when THL was used as the vehicle to repay Kokmeeuw , the conspiracy appears to have been largely organised and run from and in Spain , rather than London .
Turning to the Oakthorn transactions , the underlying agreement or combination must again have involved Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar in London and Mr de la Rosa either in Spain or again quite probably when visiting London .
The fact that Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar each received $ 22.5 m out of the $ 55m extracted in Oakthorn 1 , with Mr de la Rosa receiving only $ 5m and $ 3m going to repay Kokmeeuw in Croesus , speaks volumes about the driving forces behind this fraud , and the likelihood is that it was conceived and agreed in London .
A year later , by when Mr Jaffar had lost his formal position in the KIO , the split in Oakthorn 2 was once again $ 22.5 m to Sheikh Fahad but only $ 10m to Mr Jaffar , and this time $ 15.49 m to Mr de la Rosa , although $ 1.3 m of this went on to Mr Folchi .
His instructions led to the setting up through Mr Folchi and Mr Russell of the Oakthorn structure in Jersey .
In Oakthorn 1 , he would appear to have arranged in Spain the funding agreement executed in Madrid between THL and Banco Santander London .
The KIO , apparently through Mr Ball , acquired Spanish Treasury bills to a total value of Ptas .54.43 b for this and other purposes .
An agreement was then signed in London between the KIO and GT by which the former ceded these bills to the latter .
In both Oakthorn transactions , the instructions passed by Mr Folchi to Mr Russell for payments out of Oakthorn came from Mr Ball in London -LRB- although there were some supplementary instructions and discussions from and with Mr de la Rosa -RRB- .
Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar and Sheikh Khaled must all have been party to this in London , and Sheikh Khaled \ 's evidence suggests that it was also discussed with Mr de la Rosa in London .
According to Mr Folchi , Mr Ball instructed him regarding the possibility of war payments at a meeting in London in or about September 1990 and also instructed him as to the destinations of payments , probably by telephone while he was in Geneva .
Mr de la Rosa consulted Mr Folchi in Spain , he arranged for Mr Folchi to be made a director of THL and Mr Folchi was thereafter on his instructions active in Geneva and in issuing instructions to Mr Russell and Bakers Trust .
If one attempts to identify a place where its substance of the tort occurred , there is a choice between England , Switzerland and Spain .
The underlying agreement was , as I have said , made in England , and instructions can be found emanating from both England and Spain .
The monies came from Spain , and GT suffered loss in Spain , in it sent $ 300m from Spain to Geneva as a preliminary to the fraud , and such monies never returned to Spain .
Spanish law To the extent that Spanish law is applicable in respect of the Croesus and Wardbase transactions -LRB- and , in case I am wrong in my conclusions that it is not applicable to the other transactions , in respect of those also -RRB- , it is necessary , as stated in Dicey & Morris Rule 203 , to consider whether the acts relied upon by GT to establish the English tort of conspiracy were civilly actionable according to the law of Spain at the relevant times .
The requirement of actionability according to the law of the foreign country under Rule 203 in Dicey & Morris was considered by Moore-Bick J. in the Kuwait Oil Tanker case , at pp.97-100 , where he identified the following relevant principles : -LRB- 1 -RRB- there is no need in the first instance for a plaintiff to plead foreign law - he can rely on the presumption that it is the same as English law , unless and except in so far as the defendant pleads and calls evidence to the contrary ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- the legal basis of actionability abroad need not be the same as that in England ; and -LRB- 3 -RRB- even if , under the foreign law , the only basis on which any claim could be advanced positively excludes any other legal basis -LRB- for example where a foreign doctrine of cumul requires any claim to be pursued in contract , and excludes any parallel or supplementary tortious claim -RRB- , that is irrelevant ; and the claim will still be actionable as a tort in England , with the foreign contract claim satisfying the requirement of actionability abroad .
In the present case , there can be little doubt about the liability of Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar and Mr de la Rosa in respect of the Croesus and Oakthorn 1 and 2 transactions as well as , together with Sheikh Khaled , in respect of the Pincinco transaction , nor of the further liability of Mr de la Rosa in respect of the Wardbase transaction .
There is a difference in the standard of proof in criminal and civil cases in Spain which mirrors the difference in England .
But Professor Ramos \ 's evidence shows it is very common in Spain for civil proceedings to be brought based on facts amounting to a crime in circumstances where no criminal proceedings are ever brought or contemplated .
Ingredient -LRB- iii -RRB- was considered in Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v. Ming , where Lord Nicholls gave the advice of the Privy Council .
-LRB- as he was -RRB- in Agip -LRB- Africa -RRB- Ltd. v. Jackson -LSB- 1990 -RSB- Ch .
He said this at pp.294-5 : `` Mr. Jackson and Mr. Griffin are professional men .
Can Mr. Jackson and Mr. Griffin possibly have believed that their arrangements had an honest purpose .
Had Mr. Jackson and Mr. Griffin given evidence to this effect , I might or might not have believed it .
What did Mr. Jackson and Mr. Griffin think was going on .
Further , Millett J. went on immediately to say that it was not necessary to rest his decision on this ground , and the Court of Appeal in upholding him did not do so either : see -LSB- 1991 -RSB- Ch .547 .
The Croesus , Oakthorn and Pincinco transactions all clearly involved breaches of fiduciary duty by Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar and Mr de la Rosa , whether in their capacities as GT directors or simply as persons wrongfully misappropriating and misusing monies belonging to THL and/or GT .
The plaintiffs submit that Mr Soler falls into the same category as the defendants in Agip v. Jackson , who suspected or took the risk of fraud on the plaintiffs .
Mr Coll I have concluded in section IV .3 -LRB- f -RRB- that he rendered assistance in the Croesus , Oakthorn and Pincinco transactions .
Mr Coll believed that the Croesus and Oakthorn transactions , and the improprieties in which he involved himself in relation to them , related to movements of money being made in the interests of his clients .
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait represented a unique situation , lending credibility to the idea of secret war payments by GT in the interests of the KIO and the State of Kuwait .
In The Arab Monetary Fund v. Hashim -LRB- unreported , 29th July 1994 -RRB- , Chadwick J considered the relevant law in the context of a claim by the plaintiffs to hold a bank -LRB- FNBC -RRB- liable as constructive trustee for dishonestly assisting Dr Hashim to misappropriate the plaintiffs \ ' monies .
The second requirement , as it seems to me , was that the English Court must have satisfied itself that there was no rule of any relevant foreign law which - in the words of Lord Pearson in Boys - v - Chaplin -LRB- supra , -LSB- 1971 -RSB- AC 356 , 397 -RRB- - would provide a defence to the AMF \ 's cause of action ; or - as it might , perhaps , be put in the context of a Barnes - v - Addy constructive trust claim - would make it inequitable to hold that an FNBC defendant should be treated as if it were a trustee .
Lord Wilberforce explained the reason for requiring actionablility in the foreign court in these terms -LRB- ibid , at page 389 D-G -RRB- : \ ` The broad principle should surely be that a person should not be permitted to claim in England in respect of a matter for which civil liability does not exist , or is excluded , under the law of the place where the wrong was committed .
Although the observations in the passage cited are general in nature , I am not at all sure that Lord Wilberforce would have taken the view that conduct which was properly to be regarded as dishonest in the light of the relevant provisions of the local law - but , in respect of which the local law gave no civil remedy - ought not to be the subject of a successful Barnes - v - Addy constructive trust claim in England .
It is reasonably clear that Lord Donovan and Lord Pearson would not have taken that view - see , ibid , at pages 383D and 405F .
Mr Folchi \ 's assistance was in substance rendered in Spain , although his activity in Geneva on 2nd/3rd October 1990 was significant .
In the Dubai Aluminium case , Rix J. pointed out that the test of `` commercially unacceptable conduct in the particular context involved '' which Lord Nicholls in the Royal Brunei case cited from Knox J \ 's judgment in Cowan de Groot Properties Ltd. v. Eagle Trust Ltd. .
-LRB- following Millett J in Agip -LRB- Africa -RRB- Ltd v Jackson -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 4 All ER 385 at 405 , -LSB- 1990 -RSB- Ch 265 , 293 -RRB- also expressed a reservation about the over refinement of categories of knowledge .
Equitable tracing The plaintiffs \ ' claim to establish proprietary tracing claims into -LRB- a -RRB- the monies standing to the credit of the Better Trust in the Bahamas , deriving from Sheikh Fahad \ 's abstractions of $ 22.5 m in the Oakthorn 1 transaction and of $ 75m in the Pincinco transaction and -LRB- b -RRB- the proceeds of sale of Esteem Limited \ 's leasehold in Cadogan Square , acquired using part of the monies abstracted by Sheikh Fahad in the Oakthorn 2 transaction .
Restitutionary subrogation is an equitable remedy which exists to prevent unjust enrichment , and does not depend on any actual or presumed intention : Banque Financi -LRB- re de la Cit ... v. Parc -LRB- Battersea -RRB- Limited -LSB- 1999 -RSB- 1 AC 221 .
-LRB- 13 -RRB- Sheikh Fahad , Mr Jaffar and Mr de la Rosa were parties to the conspiracy in each of the Croesus , Oakthorn 1 , Oakthorn 2 and Pincinco transactions , with Sheikh Khaled as a co-conspirator in the Pincinco transaction .
-LRB- 14 -RRB- The substance of the conspiracy was committed in Spain in the case of the Croesus and Wardbase transactions , but not in the other transactions -LRB- section V. 1 -LRB- e -RRB- -RRB- .
To the extent that the substance of a conspiracy was committed in Spain , it had , in order to be actionable in England , also to be actionable under Spanish law .
-LRB- 19 -RRB- GT is entitled to be subrogated to THL \ 's claims to trace -LRB- in terms set out below -RRB- -LRB- i -RRB- into the Better Trust set up by Sheikh Fahad in the Bahamas , consequent upon Sheikh Fahad \ 's receipt of the sums of $ 22.5 m and $ 75m in the Oakthorn 1 and Pincinco transactions and subsequent movement of such sums and proceeds thereof into the Better Trust in early 1993 , and -LRB- ii -RRB- into the proceeds of sale of the leasehold interest in 52 Cadogan Place held by Esteem Limited , consequent upon the acquisition of such interest by use of \ xc2 \ xa33 ,150,000 out of the sum of $ 22.5 m received by Sheikh Fahad in the Oakthorn 2 transaction -LRB- section V. 5 -RRB- .
Orders -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ t The first defendant , Sheikh Fahad : -LRB- i -RRB- \ tGT is entitled to judgment against the first defendant for damages for conspiracy in respect of -LRB- a -RRB- the Croesus transaction , for $ 25m and $ 2,576,707 ; -LRB- b -RRB- the Oakthorn 1 transaction , for $ 55m ; -LRB- c -RRB- the Oakthorn 2 transaction , for $ 50m ; and -LRB- d -RRB- the Pincinco transaction , -LRB- i -RRB- $ 300m lost in October 1990 , -LRB- ii -RRB- Ptas .2,375,000,000 lost in July 1991 and -LRB- iii -RRB- $ 6,144,000 lost in the second half of 1991 ; in addition , THL is , as it presently appears to me , but subject to hearing further argument on this one point , entitled to judgment for sums disbursed in the first half of 1992 and not made good by GT , consisting of Ptas .83,822,630 in total to Zymo , $ 38,123 to Russell Limebeer and Ptas .62,000,000 to Coggia .
-LRB- c -RRB- An account shall be taken before a Master of the Queen \ 's Bench Division as to any profits , investment income , growth or interest earned on or with the sums of $ 22.5 m and $ 75m paid into account G772 at Lombard Odier & Cie. , Geneva on 31st July 1989 and 4th October 1990 respectively -LRB- i -RRB- whilst such sums were in such account or any sub-accounts thereof and -LRB- ii -RRB- whilst the Fund has been in the hands of Pictet Bank and Trust Limited and/or Pictet Overseas Trust Corporation Limited -LRB- iv -RRB- Any recoveries actually achieved by GT in respect of the proceeds of sale of the leasehold interest at 52 Cadogan Place and/or any such profits , investment income , growth or interest earned thereon or therewith , as referred to in paragraph -LRB- ii -RRB- above , shall , as and when such recoveries may actually be achieved and not before , be credited against any damages and interest recoverable from the first defendant by GT under paragraph -LRB- 1 -RRB- -LRB- i -RRB- -LRB- b -RRB- .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- \ t The third defendant , Mr Jaffar : -LRB- i -RRB- There will be judgment against the third defendant for damages for conspiracy in respect of -LRB- a -RRB- the Croesus transaction , for $ 25m and $ 2,576,707 ; -LRB- b -RRB- the Oakthorn 1 transaction , for $ 55m ; -LRB- c -RRB- the Oakthorn 2 transaction , for $ 50m ; and -LRB- d -RRB- the Pincinco transaction , -LRB- i -RRB- $ 300m lost in October 1990 , -LRB- ii -RRB- Ptas .2,375,000,000 lost in July 1991 and -LRB- iii -RRB- $ 6,144,000 lost in the second half of 1991 ; in addition , THL is , .
The Patels were supported in their first two objections by Mr Lewis appearing on behalf of the Law Society .
In the course of the investigation Detective Sergeant Padgham of the Kent Police interviewed the Patels in Bombay in September 1993 in the presence of Mr Prakash Patel of Magwells .
The agreement stipulated , among other things , that any oral or written statements supplied by the Patels would not be used to prosecute them for any offence by the Serious Fraud Office within the United Kingdom and that , save for disclosure to any defendant \ 's solicitors or under compulsion of the court , the Serious Fraud Office would not disclose the material to any other third party .
In a statement made by Mr Prakash Patel for the purposes of the present application he has described what happened as follows : \ tWhat I provided were privileged documents drafted by K R and R M Patel themselves for the purpose of notifying me of their position .
I flew to India at the request of K R and R M Patel to be present at their interviews by DS Padgham and DC Hodge .
8388 , para 3.1 -RRB- Contract apart , the principal views are either that it is founded on an equitable obligation , but for breach of which the court has inherent power to award monetary compensation in addition to or instead of other remedies -LRB- see , for example , the judgments of Deane J. in Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd v Phillip Morris Ltd -LRB- no. 2 -RRB- -LRB- 1984 -RRB- 156 CLR 414 , 437 to 438 and Gummow J. in Smith , Kline and French Laboratories -LRB- Australia -RRB- Ltd v Secretary to the Department of Community Services and Health -LSB- 1990 -RSB- FSR 617 , affirmed -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 28 FSR 291 -RRB- or that it is a branch of law sui generis , founded on a multi-faceted jurisdiction , under which the court may award a full range of equitable and common law remedies -LRB- see the judgment of Sopinka J. in LAC Minerals Ltd v International Corona Resources Limited -LSB- 1990 -RSB- FSR 441 , 495 to 497 -RRB- .
Under the decision in Reg v Cox and Railton -LRB- 1884 -RRB- 14 QBD 153 , when the accused has consulted his solicitor after the commission of a crime for the legitimate purpose of being defended the communication is privileged , the privilege being that of the client .
In Cox and Railton , to which Scrutton L.J .
The unqualified nature of that right , once established , was recently affirmed in England and in Australia in R v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B and in Carter v Northmore Hale Davy and Leake -LRB- 1995 -RRB- 183 CLR 121 .
Both cases involved the same point and there is a striking similarity in the reasoning of the House of Lords and of the High Court of Australia .
Two English decisions -LRB- R v Barton -LSB- 1973 -RSB- 1W .
798 -RRB- and a New Zealand decision -LRB- R v Craig -LSB- 1975 -RSB- 1 NZ L.R .
In Carter the High Court of Australia declined to follow those decisions , and shortly afterwards the House of Lords in R v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B came to the same result -LRB- without Carter being cited -RRB- , overruling Barton and Ataou .
in Anderson v Bank of British Columbia -LRB- 1876 -RRB- 2 Ch D 644 , 649 : \ tThe object and meaning of the rule is this : that as , by reason of the complexity and difficulty of our law , litigation can only be properly conducted by professional men , it is absolutely necessary that a man , in order to prosecute his rights or to defend himself from an improper claim , should have recourse to the assistance of professional lawyers , and it being so absolutely necessary , it is equally necessary , to use a vulgar phrase , that he should be able to make a clean breast of it to the gentleman whom he consults with a view to the prosecution of his claim , or the substantiating of his defence against the claim of others ; that he should be able to place unrestricted and unbounded confidence in the professional agent , and that the communications he so makes to him should be kept secret , unless with his consent \ xc2 \ x85 that he should be enabled properly to conduct his litigation .
\ tAs for the analogy with public interest immunity , I accept that the various classes of case in which relevant evidence is excluded may , as Lord Simon of Glaisdale suggested -LSB- in D v National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children -LSB- 1978 -RSB- AC 171 , 233 -RSB- , be regarded as forming part of a continuous spectrum .
summarised the position in Paragon Finance plc v Freshfields -LSB- 1999 -RSB- 1 WLR 1183 , 1188 as follows : \ tThe nature and basis of legal professional privilege has been often and authoritatively expounded , most recently in Reg v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B -LSB- 1996 -RSB- AC 487 .
In Carter v Northmore Hale Davy and Leake -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 183 CLR 121 Deane J .
Said at pages 132 to 134 : \ t `` In the courts below , both Seaman J. and Rowland J. correctly pointed out that a majority of this Court in Baker v Campbell -LRB- 1983 -RRB- 153 CLR 52 at 88 , 95 to 96 , 116 to 117 , 131 to 132 , clearly accepted that legal professional privilege is not a mere rule of evidence but is a substantive and fundamental common law principle ... \ tWhere legal professional privilege attaches , there is no question of balancing the considerations favouring the protection of confidentiality against any considerations favouring disclosure in the circumstances of the particular case .
was later to describe -LSB- in Minet v Morgan -LRB- 1873 -RRB- 8 Ch App 361 , 368 -RSB- as `` one of the ablest judgments of one of the ablest Judges who ever sat in this Court '' : \ t \ tThe discovery and vindication and establishment of truth are main purposes certainly of the existence of Courts of Justice ; still , for the obtaining of these objects , which , however valuable and important , can not be usefully pursued without moderation , can not be either usefully or creditably pursued unfairly or gained by unfair means , not every channel is open to them .
Thus a lawyer who communicates a confidential communication to others without his client \ 's authorisation could be sued by his client for damages ; or a third party who had accidentally seen the contents of a lawyer \ 's file could be prohibited by injunction from disclosing them ... \ tThere is no doubt that this right belonging to a person in his dealings with others , including the State , is part of our Quebec public law as well as of the common law ... \ tThe rule of evidence is well known ; it has often been stated .
It is also , as Lord Taylor said in R v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B , much more than an ordinary rule of evidence , being considered a fundamental condition on which the administration of justice rests .
in England from the `` privilege '' and any rules as to the protection of confidentiality , in France from an amalgam of `` le secret professionel '' , `` les droits de la defense '' and rules applicable to `` le secret des lettres confidentielles '' .
In support of those submissions Mr. Munby cited the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in Silver v United Kingdom -LRB- 1983 -RRB- 5 EHRR 347 , Campbell v United v Kingdom -LRB- 1992 -RRB- 15 EHRR 137 and Niemietz v Germany -LRB- 1992 -RRB- 16 EHRR 97 .
The first was stated by Lord Hoffmann in R v Home Secretary ex parte Simms , 8 July 1999 -LRB- unreported -RRB- as follows : \ tParliamentary sovereignty means that Parliament can , if it chooses , legislate contrary to fundamental principles of human rights .
-LRB- The decision of the House of Lords in ex parte Simms was delivered after the argument in the present case .
In the passage from R v Home Secretary ex parte Leech cited above , Steyn L.J .
If ever there was a case for such a qualification , R v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B might have been thought to be that case , but three connected factors caused the House of Lords to conclude that the principle of legal confidentiality should be maintained intact .
As to the Convention , it was not suggested that the fact that the Patels have lived at all material times in India and that the documents whose production is sought were brought into existence in connection with their interviews by the police in Bombay affects their entitlement to the protection of the Convention in relation to the present application .
I have already cited the passage in R v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B in which Lord Nicholls considered the matter also in the context of other types of claim and concluded that there was no principled way by which judges could `` ascribe an appropriate weight , on each side of the scale , to the diverse multitude of various claims , civil and criminal , and other interests of the client on the one hand and the person seeking disclosure on the other hand '' .
First , that the record of the interviews in Bombay would show that K R and R M Patel accepted that they knew that there was no underlying transaction in respect of the bills of exchange the subject of and referred to in this action .
If such wider interests are to be factored into the equation , the view of the common law as stated in R v Derby Magistrates \ ' Court ex parte B is that they prevail - or , as Lord Taylor put it , that any balancing was done a long time ago .
Mr Justice Langley \ t \ t \ tINDEX \ t \ t \ t \ tPages Introduction \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t1 The Parties \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t1 The Issues \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t3 Dramatis Personae \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t6 The Bingham Canyon Mine \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t7 The Smelter \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t7 The Smelter Modernisation Project \ t \ t \ t \ t9 The Insurance \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ tThe CAR Policy/Reinsurance \ t \ t \ t \ t13 \ tThe Operational Policy/Reinsurance Contract \ t \ t14 Chronology \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t1994 and the August Meeting \ t \ t \ t \ t20 \ tEarly 1995 \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t25 \ tThe Frisco Fax \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t34 \ tApril 28 , 1995 \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t37 \ tThe May Schedule and the London Market \ t \ t48 \ tThe Overseas Market \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t52 \ tSubsequent Events -LRB- May to September 1995 -RRB- \ t55 \ tPlant Performance \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t63 \ t16th September to 25th October \ t \ t \ t66 \ tThe October Endorsement \ t \ t \ t \ t67 \ t25th October to 10th December \ t \ t \ t68 \ tEvents after 10th December \ t \ t \ t \ t72 The Technical Experts \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t79 Minets Authority \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t85 Objects \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t87 The Wording Construction Issues \ t \ t \ t \ t \ tProperty Exclusion 15 \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t88 \ tClause 9 -LRB- b -RRB- \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t92 \ tPerils Exclusion 12 \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t93 The April 28 Oral Agreement Issues \ t \ t \ t \ t94 The October Endorsement \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t98 The Issues \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t101 ANNEXE A \ t \ tThe Reinsurers ANNEXE B \ t \ tList of Issues ANNEXE C \ t \ tDramatis Personae ANNEXE D \ tTesting Provisions in the Smelter Modernisation Project Contracts ANNEXE E \ t \ tthe Frisco Fax ANNEXE F \ t \ tthe Information Note and the Baines Subjectivity ANNEXE G \ t \ tThe May Schedule ANNEXE H \ t \ tThe 22 June Endorsement ANNEXE I \ t \ tThe October Endorsement ANNEXE J \ t \ tMonthly Reports of Plant Operations DRAFT JUDGMENT Mr Justice Langley : INTRODUCTION The issues to which this judgment relate concern the reinsurance of the First Claimant -LRB- KUCC -RRB- company \ xc2 \ x92s copper mine and smelting and refining plant situated at Bingham Canyon , Magna , in the State of Utah in the United States of America .
Minets were appointed in July 1994 in succession to Alexander & Alexander -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93A & A \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- in America and Alexander Howden -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93Howdens \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- in Europe for the placing of the operational cover and the 1995/6 cover was the first operational cover broked by Minets for TCI .
Mr Murrell \ 's `` boss '' was Mr Webster .
Mr Powell and Mr Warwick worked in Minets construction division , and dealt with the CAR policy .
THE BINGHAM CANYON MINE The mine is situated about 20 miles west of Salt Lake City , Utah .
Other companies which had lines on the CAR reinsurance and which are also Defendants with lines on the operational reinsurance are Scor -LRB- 18.52 % -RRB- Cigna -LRB- 9.26 % -RRB- CTR -LRB- 1.85 % -RRB- and Abeille -LRB- 1.39 % -RRB- .
In August Minets -LRB- Messrs Alford-Smith and Webster -RRB- visited Salt Lake City to meet representatives of RTZ and KUCC .
By a fax to Kennecott copied to Minets dated August 26 , RTZ \ xc2 \ x92s Risk Management Adviser -LRB- Mr Saunders -RRB- stated that it was \ xc2 \ x93not worth taking the chance \ xc2 \ x94 of trying a \ xc2 \ x93testing/commissioning claim \ xc2 \ x94 on operational underwriters and therefore \ xc2 \ x93Kennecott should stand by their decision and accept the business interruption risk until the facility is in a regular operating mode .
On October 11 , Kennecott by Mr Batchelor , in a letter copied to Mr Young and Mr Done , informed Mr Alford-Smith that there had been \ xc2 \ x93a misunderstanding \ xc2 \ x94 about the issue of testing and commissioning and that he would \ xc2 \ x93need to ensure the underwriters concerned are aware that this exposure is to be covered under the construction program as originally envisaged \ xc2 \ x94 .
The note then records : Following the ... explanation Ken -LRB- Done -RRB- advised that Kennecott had misunderstood the basis of when an item of plant is transferred onto the operational cover .
It also demonstrates an understanding within Minets -LRB- and in particular by Mr Powell -RRB- communicated to Kennecott that `` an operational policy would not normally accept items until they had been tested up to 100 % of their design capacity '' .
Mr Webster explained that the existing operational policy leader -LRB- Kemper -RRB- wanted details of the commissioning/hot testing carried out and almost certainly an explanation as to the 85 % and not 100 % , adding that the question would be whether the shortfall of 15 % would go to the `` integrity of the facility as a whole or is only a routine capacity issue '' and that he could imagine such a difference `` could be highly material '' if it related to the new Smelter but he was optimistic it might not be so with the refinery .
The attachment of the copper refinery to the existing operational policy was the subject of a revised endorsement signed by Mr Zimmerman and Mr Pignat for Swiss Re on February 21 .
On February 15 , Minets -LRB- Mr Webster -RRB- had met Mr Done , Mr Young and Mr Trunnell in San Francisco .
Mr Webster \ 's note of the meeting records `` much discussion '' of `` the perceived problems relating to the \ ` commissioning \ ' of the new Smelter '' which in Mr Done \ 's view `` would be phased commissioning over many months and might never reach 100 % of design capacity '' as described by Mr Webster and Mr Young .
A note from Mr Webster to Mr Powell dated March 7 shows that he was expecting handovers to the operational cover to be dependant upon underwriters approving information which would include a `` summary of hot testing procedures '' and `` final performance testing '' .
By a fax dated March 22 Mr Webster pressed Kennecott , via Mr Trunnell , to provide the agreed information `` in order to simplify and agree in advance with underwriters the addition of the new Smelter , thus minimising the problems experienced with the addition of the new Copper Refinery '' .
On March 23 , distributed internally within Kennecott and KUCC and to Mr Young and Mr Trunnell , Mr Done wrote a Memorandum on the subject of the Smelter Insurance Handover .
However in the course of a telephone conversation on March 28 , reflected in a second fax that day from Mr Webster to Mrs Turner , Mr Webster agreed with Mr Trunnell and Mr Young that whilst desirable it was not essential to have details of actual testing and commissioning procedures and performance testing and the priority was to have a summary of the commissioning of any items already handed over and operating .
On April 7 Mr Webster and Mr Murrell visited Mr Zimmerman and Mr Pignat in Zurich to discuss the renewal .
Mr Zimmerman wrote to Minets on April 11 to confirm that Swiss Re would write a line of 20 % , stated that Swiss Re wanted to inspect the key locations , made some comments on the wording and that -LRB- as was usual for Swiss Re -RRB- it would be a condition that : Swiss Re to be treated equally as leader and to be offered most preferential terms / conditions .
On April 13 Mr Trunnell sent a fax to Mrs Turner , copied to Mr Webster , stating that `` project management had sent numerous performance test procedures '' but they were not identical to the components previously discussed and so he and Mr Done had decided that rather than presenting `` an incomplete or confusing picture '' it might be best to have the project management discuss the matter with Mr Powell who was due to visit Magna on April 25 and Mr Powell could carry the documentation back to London and `` assist -LSB- Mr Webster -RSB- as needed .
Mr Webster sent a copy of this fax to Mr Powell and sought a discussion with him before he left for America .
Mr Webster \ 's expressed concern in a note to Mr Powell was again that there was a `` language problem '' as regards `` performance test procedures '' and `` commissioning '' .
KUCC was represented by Mr George -LRB- amongst others -RRB- , Mr Young was present for RTZ , Mr Trunnell was also present as were Mr Powell and Mr Rastall of Minets .
THE FRISCO FAX Mr Powell was staying at The Pan Pacific Hotel in San Francisco and he used the hotel \ 's fax facilities on April 26 to send a number of handwritten faxes .
It was sent to Mr Trunnell at Jardine \ 's offices in San Francisco and to Mr Bommeli at a Hotel in New York .
It was also sent to Messrs Warwick and Webster at Minets in London , where it arrived in the early hours of the morning of Thursday April 27 .
Mr Powell also sent to London for typing a draft letter to Mr George assuring him that Mr Young , Mr Trunnell , Kennecott \ 's Insurance Department and Minets would ensure a `` smooth/seamless transfer of the completed works from the Construction policy to the Operational policy .
We have samples of commissioning procedure/criteria and will pass to you next week '' adding that Mr Powell suggested that Mr Webster should `` proceed with broking this information and wait and see if Allianz , etc require the samples '' .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Mr Webster drafted a number of letters dated April 28 to various of the London-based reinsurance underwriters , Swiss Re , Mr Trunnell , Mrs Turner and Mr Saunders enclosing the wording , `` two endorsements and an advisory letter '' which he said in the letter had been agreed with `` the Contract Leader , the Allianz .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Mr Webster wrote a hand-written note to Mr Murrell thanking him for all his help and saying : Can you now do what needs to be done to tidy things up .
It is , I think , of some significance that the Frisco Fax was neither referred to nor `` attached '' to this note from Mr Webster to Mr Murrell , nor was it an enclosure to the letters he drafted .
-LRB- 7 -RRB- Mr Powell and Mr Rastall sent to Mr George -LRB- with copies to Mr Trunnell and Mr Bommeli -RRB- a fax enclosing what became the May Schedule -LRB- Annexe G -RRB- described as a `` summary of the information relayed at '' their meeting and asking Mr George to let them know if it was incorrect adding that its purpose was to provide `` construction and property insurers with an overview/best estimate '' and assuring him of `` a smooth/seamless transfer of the completed works '' from the CAR policy to the Operational policy .
This was the final version of the draft sent to London by Mr Powell for typing with the Frisco Fax .
Mr Baines \ ' account is to the effect that Mr Murrell brought the Information Note to him in the afternoon and he wrote the Baines subjectivity on it at his desk in the presence of both Mr Murrell and Mr Stewart , intending by doing so to ensure that the operational policy would not provide cover until all the property to attach was fully completed and operational .
Mr Stewart \ 's account is to much the same effect , namely that he was present at a meeting between Mr Baines and Mr Murrell in the afternoon at Mr Baines \ ' desk .
Mr Stewart had said that he did not have authority to sign off on the Information Note and had left Mr Murrell at his desk and gone to talk to Mr Baines .
Mr Murrell had not seen Mr Baines write the Baines subjectivity but had discussed testing and commissioning with Mr Stewart on his return with it when he had referred him again to page 5 of the Frisco Fax and to the definition in Property Exclusion 15 of the policy wording .
Apart from the possibility that he exchanged greetings with Mr Baines , Mr Murrell was certain that the only conversations of substance he had were with Mr Stewart .
Nonetheless I am satisfied that the account given by Mr Baines and , in particular , Mr Stewart is more accurate than that given by Mr Murrell .
My reasons are that : -LRB- 1 -RRB- I do not think either Mr Baines or Mr Murrell -LRB- or Mr Stewart -RRB- had focused on the wording at the time of the meeting in any real detail , and certainly not in the context of attachment of the Smelter Modernisation Project .
I think and find that in fact neither of them saw the subjectivity as a problem or concern because both believed it did no more than emphasise and reflect what was normal and , in Mr Murrell \ 's case , what he had understood from Mr Webster was in any event the , or to be the , case .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- I can not accept Mr Murrell \ 's evidence that he showed the Frisco Fax to Mr Stewart , let alone that he specifically drew page 5 of it to his attention , nor that he drew Mr Stewart \ 's attention to the wording .
It is true that the Information Note makes limited sense without the Frisco Fax as the `` item nos '' can only be identified to particular parts of the plant with the help of the last -LRB- typed -RRB- page of the Fax but I do not think either Mr Baines or Mr Stewart -LRB- or indeed Mr Murrell -RRB- paid that degree of attention to the Note and the omission was made good when the May Schedule -LRB- which was more accurate than the Frisco Fax and being checked for presentation to underwriters at the time -RRB- was produced .
Further had Mr Murrell referred to the Frisco Fax as he said he did I think he would have ensured that it too was stamped and initialled , and Mr Stewart said , and I accept , that he would in any event have stamped and copied it if it had been shown to him .
I would add that the terms of the Information Note -LRB- `` values to be agreed with Allianz '' -RRB- and of the Baines subjectivity -LRB- `` Agreed subject to ... '' -RRB- are wholly consistent with the evidence both of Mr Baines and Mr Murrell that what was being sought by Minets and agreed by Allianz Cornhill was the attachment or contingent attachment to the cover of the various items of the Smelter Modernisation Project .
I find that : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThe substantive discussions took place between Mr Baines and Mr Murrell in the presence of Mr Stewart .
THE MAY SCHEDULE AND THE LONDON MARKET On May 2 Mrs Turner sent to Minets `` the May Schedule '' -LRB- Annexe G -RRB- , which she had received from Mr Trunnell , saying that she needed confirmation from reinsurers that they had accepted and agreed the attachments to the operational policy as set out before she could confirm cover to Kennecott on behalf of TCI .
Mr Murrell then sent a fax to Mrs Turner confirming that Allianz Cornhill as leading underwriter had agreed `` the attachments '' as had the following market in London and that he was awaiting confirmation from overseas but did not see any problems in their agreement .
As for the London market , on May 3 , Sampo/Hansa had stamped -LRB- by Mr Johnson \ 's colleague , Mr Carl Salt -RRB- `` per leader '' the Information Note and the May Schedule .
Mr Bottomley \ 's evidence was that he had met Mr Murrell some time in April 1995 to discuss participation by New Hampshire in the operational cover .
He said Mr Murrell had told him that the plant was undergoing a testing period but that this would not be covered and Mr Bottomley had told Mr Murrell that , in accordance with New Hampshire \ 's standard approach , he was not prepared to cover a testing and commissioning risk .
It is right to record that in the course of cross-examination by Mr Edelman based upon the contents of the underwriting file , Mr Bottomley \ 's confidence in his belief that he was not shown the Frisco Fax on May 3 when Mr Murrell visited him again was considerably shaken .
As set out above , Mr Webster had written to Mr Bottomley -LRB- and to Cigna -RRB- on April 28 attaching the `` core wording '' , two endorsements and `` an advisory letter '' -LRB- the Information Note : Annexe F -RRB- stating that they had been agreed with Allianz Cornhill .
Mr Murrell visited Mr Knowles of M&G on May 5 when Mr Knowles signed the slip for a 2 % line .
Mr Knowles \ ' evidence was that he was shown the Information Note , with the Baines subjectivity , the two endorsements and the May Schedule and that he told Mr Murrell that M&G \ 's participation was subject to the Baines subjectivity , which they discussed .
THE OVERSEAS MARKET On May 4 Mr Piper of Minets sent faxes to Mr Pignat of Swiss Re , to Mr Knights of MCR , and to Imperio , Abeille , Scor , CTR , and GS attaching the two endorsements , the Information Note with the Baines subjectivity , the May Schedule and the Frisco Fax seeking their agreement and `` confirmation by return '' .
The fact that Mr Piper undoubtedly sent the Frisco Fax to the overseas market as an enclosure to these letters and did so , on his evidence , on the instructions of Mr Murrell , was understandably relied upon by Mr Edelman to support Mr Murrell \ 's evidence that he would and did also show it to the London market and in particular Mr Stewart .
On May 4 Mr Warwick of Minets , who had obtained some papers from Mr Murrell , sent them to Mr Powell with a handwritten note .
Mr Pignat sent the wording to Mr Murrell and Mr Webster on May 12 approved by Swiss Re subject to a number of points of no relevance to the issues .
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS -LRB- May to September 1995 -RRB- It is common ground that mechanical and pre-operational testing of the Acid Plant had been completed and the Plant handed over by Monsanto to Kennecott by May 31 , when hot gas was first introduced from feed fed into the FSF for the first time .
Mr Powell copied the fax and Memorandum to Mr Webster on June 29 the date when he received it .
From September 5 to 7 Paul Smith , a surveyor from Allianz Cornhill -LRB- who was not , in the event , called to give evidence -RRB- and Mr Monse , a surveyor from Swiss Re -LRB- who did give evidence -RRB- had visited the plant at Magna .
They were shown round the plant by Mr Young of RTZ and Mr Despain and Mr Newman amongst others of KUCC .
Mr Stewart said without challenge that this mark would have been added at Mr Murrell \ 's request .
25th OCTOBER to 10th DECEMBER There was a meeting on October 31 between THG and Minets -LRB- Messrs Bolton , Alford-Smith , Powell and Webster -RRB- and Mr Trunnell , TCI and Kennecott .
Jeff Powell stated that the Allianz and co-insurers were aware of the hand over date and had been shown a schedule of the concept going on .
Jeff Powell said no , this was not the case and Allianz and property insurers advised of the position re schedule of hand over dates etc .
If Mr Webster did believe as is recorded then it would have been a matter of no moment or surprise to him -LRB- or Mr Murrell whom he instructed -RRB- that the Baines subjectivity had been put down or that reference had been made to an understanding of what that required on the lines of Mr Baines \ ' and Mr Stewart \ 's evidence .
Indeed his belief is , as one would expect to have happened , wholly consistent with Mr Murrell having alerted Mr Webster to the Baines subjectivity and the circumstances in which , as I have found , it was written .
It is also wholly consistent with the understanding both Mr Webster and Mr Murrell had of the limits to the cover normally provided by property or operational underwriters .
Mr Beals sent the report on his visit to Magna with a letter to the President of Kennecott dated November 7 .
Mr Beals was described by Mr George as a `` technical man who sat on the Board '' of RTZ and as someone with considerable experience in copper smelting .
On November 22 a meeting was held between Allianz Cornhill -LRB- Messrs Baines , Stewart and Gurney -RRB- , THG and Minets -LRB- Messrs Bolton , Murrell and Alford-Smith -RRB- .
Mr Gurney \ 's notes record that there was discussion of the testing and commissioning carried out by Kennecott .
On January 22 Irisc -LRB- Mr Cresswell -RRB- reported to Mr Chambers .
THG saw a copy of this Report and informed Mr Bolton by fax dated February 9 of their disagreement with it and in particular with underwriters attempt now to `` import language into the contract which is inconsistent with '' what THG said was Kennecott \ 's intention namely `` to provide insurance against risk of loss during the ramp up '' .
On February 16 a meeting was held at Allianz Cornhill \ 's offices between Allianz Cornhill -LRB- Messrs Baines , Stewart and Chambers -RRB- and Minets -LRB- Murrell and Bolton -RRB- .
These notes record Mr Murrell stating that when he spoke to Graham Stewart on the 27th April 1995 -LRB- agreed to be an error for 28 -RRB- advising of inclusion of the new FCF , Allianz agreed subject to exclusion of testing and commissioning and were shown a fax dated 26/4/95 from Jeff Powell advising of the handover of the furnace on the operational risk cover .
The notes also record `` an implication that Minet should have been aware of Allianz \ 's interpretation of testing and commissioning '' but there can be no doubt that had Mr Baines or Mr Stewart recalled the conversation on April 28 as they claimed to do when giving evidence then they should have taken issue with this and the reference to the Fax .
This letter must have crossed with Mr Bolton \ 's letter to Mr Chambers enclosing his notes of the meeting .
Mr Edelman rightly cross-examined both Mr Baines and Mr Stewart on this and neither could offer any satisfying explanation for their lack of response .
Mr Daley and Dr Wright considered ramp up and the achievement of performance guarantees were part of the commissioning process , which , whilst acknowledging the word `` commissioning '' can and does have several different meanings attached to it , would not be complete until the plant is `` fit for its purpose '' which itself may and usually would be defined in the contract .
Similarly in Dr Wright \ 's opinion start-up of the Acid Plant had not been completed by December 10 because it had not by then been shown to do the job it was supposed to do and none of the performance tests required by the Monsanto contract had been carried out or attempted .
Despite Mr Smith \ 's undoubted experience , I regret to say that I found his opinions wholly unconvincing and I think they were readily exposed as such both by Mr Ter Haar in cross-examination and by the evidence of Mr Daley and Dr Wright both of whom were impressive and objective witnesses whose opinions plainly commanded respect , albeit both readily conceded that they had less experience than Mr Smith in a number of relevant areas .
There are no such absolutes ; indeed much of what Mr Smith called ramp up is , I accept from Mr Daley and Dr Wright , exactly what would usually be called commissioning and testing , and was so called in the project contracts and by those on the site at the time as is apparent from the documents .
Whilst I do not doubt Mr Smith \ 's sincerity I do think that he was advancing and in my judgment unsuccessfully seeking to defend a thesis or construct , also put forward by Mr George , which was created to meet the needs of the Claimants \ ' case faced with the overwhelming nature of the evidence as to the state of the FCF and the Acid Plant at the time of the two incidents .
I have in mind in particular Mr George \ 's Notes of August 9 , Mr Storey \ 's memorandum of July 15 , Mr Monse \ 's report on his visit in September , THG \ 's report of September 29 and Mr Beals \ ' letter and report in November .
THE APRIL 28 ORAL AGREEMENT ISSUES I have already stated my findings that : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tMr Baines and Mr Murrell did agree that the attachment of the FCF and Acid Plant was , or would be , subject to the condition that each had been `` tested and commissioned '' but that while Mr Baines gave an indication of what he expected by those words there was no agreement as to a definition ; and equally it is not open to the Claimants -LRB- or Minets -RRB- to rely on anything in the Frisco Fax to qualify the words because it was not shown to either Mr Baines or Mr Stewart .
Nonetheless , I think a court should and can seek to give effect to words which were undoubtedly used at the time and , as I find , accepted as such and as having substance as exemplified by the exchanges in August 1994 , January 1995 and March 1995 and by the subsequent references to them within Minets both by Mr Warwick on May 4 and Mr Webster on October 31 , to which I have referred in the Chronology .
As to the other underwriters -LRB- for Cigna , M&G and GS -RRB- not only did they subsequently agree to Allianz Cornhill \ 's role as leading underwriter and so to follow what the leader had agreed but Mr Knowles -LRB- M&G -RRB- expressly adopted the Baines subjectivity and both Cigna and GS scratched the Information Note with the Baines subjectivity on it .
ANNEXE A THE REINSURERS 1st Defendants `` Allianz Cornhill '' Cornhill Insurance plc -LRB- trading as Allianz Cornhill International -RRB- 23.74 % 2nd Defendants `` Swiss Re '' Swiss Reinsurance Company 20.00 % 3rd Defendants `` Sampo/Hansa '' Sampo Industrial Insurance NV -LRB- Formerly Hansa Industrial Insurance NV -RRB- 14.24 % 4th Defendants `` New Hampshire '' New Hampshire Insurance Company 14.25 % 5th Defendants `` Cigna '' Cigna Insurance Company of Europe SA-NV 9.50 % 6th Defendants `` CTR '' Compagnie Transcontinentale de Reassurance SA 5.70 % 7th Defendants `` Abeille '' Abeille Reassurance 3.80 % 8th Defendants `` MCR '' Mutuelle Centrale de Reassurance 1.19 % 9th Defendants `` Imperio '' Companhia de Seguros Imperio SA -LRB- Trading as Imperio Insurance Group -RRB- 1.90 % 10th Defendants `` Scor '' Scor Reinsurance Company 2.37 % 11th Defendants `` M&G '' The Mercantile and General Reinsurance Company Limited 1.90 % 12th Defendants `` GS '' Gjensidige Skadeforsikring 1.42 % ANNEXE C DRAMATIS PERSONAE -LRB- Those who gave evidence orally are marked with an asterisk * .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Richard Gurney : Claims Adjuster \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Paul Smith : Risk Control Specialist .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 David Webster : Deputy Managing Director , Energy Division , International Broking \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 * David Piper : Assistant Director , International Property Division \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 * Graham Bolton : Executive Director of the Claims Division .
Jeff Powell \ xc2 \ x92s assistant in London .
KUCC KUCC \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 * Christopher Newman : Technical Manager of the smelter and refinery plant at Magna .
RTZ RTZ \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Phil Young : Engineer at RTZ Risk Management Services , London .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 10 FLUOR DANIEL DAVY -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93FDD \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- FLUOR DANIEL DAVY -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93FDD \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 George Gombos : Project Manager June 1993-Spring 1995 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 John McLeavy : Project Manager Spring 1995 - \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Tim Watson : FDD Commissioning Manager \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 * Stephen Holmes : Process Engineer with FDD pre-operational testing team .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 11 MONSANTO ENVIRO-CHEM -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93MONSANTO \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- MONSANTO ENVIRO-CHEM -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93MONSANTO \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Mike Graves : Construction Superintendent .
Sections 3.1 to 3.4 provided : \ t \ t \ t '' 3.1 \ tTest runs shall be performed by KENNECOTT personnel under the supervision of OUTOKUMPU .
Mr. Justice David Steel 03 November 1999 The Claimants were the owners of a discotheque called Stage 3 in Sheppey , Kent .
In 1989 , Manson were approached by producing brokers Anderson Insurance Services Ltd -LRB- `` Anderson '' -RRB- with a view of obtaining cover for the discotheque then insured with other underwriters .
That same day , a Mr. Mariconda of Manson was requested by Mr. James to instruct Messrs Thomas Howell Selfe & Co -LRB- THS -RRB- as loss adjusters and Messrs R.B.Hawkins & Associates Ltd -LRB- Hawkins -RRB- as consulting scientists on the Defendants \ ' behalf .
Manson presented Harris \ 's report to the Defendants on the 15th October with the faxed request : - `` I await your urgent instructions as to whether it is in order for adjusters to proceed in the normal manner '' .
There is a note on the Manson file to the effect that Mr. James had in response `` Agreed OK to proceed : written confirmation to follow '' .
But on the 19th October Manson \ 's office at Waltham Abbey sent a fax to Manson \ 's office in Liverpool saying : - `` As discussed , please instruct THS to proceed .
On the 15th November , Manson presented a collection form in respect of this interim payment to the Defendant and the company market together with an application for payment of Hawkins \ 's account .
The position from the Defendant \ 's perspective is revealed in a file note of Mr. James dated the 15th January : - John Leonard -LRB- THS -RRB- phoned today and asked if he would make an interim payment of \ xc2 \ xa325 ,000 as insured was having difficulty in meeting certain commitments with the bank and a leasing company regarding his car .
It does indeed appear that about this time Mr. James instructed Mr. Perry of Messrs Pickering Kenyon to act as the Defendant \ 's solicitor .
Mr. James thereupon telephoned Mr. Mariconda of Manson .
The next day someone at Manson telephoned Mr. James to find out how the meeting had gone .
Mr. James brought Manson up to date , repeating that he was not minded to release any further money until an agreement on settlement was reached .
Mr. James went on to urge that the fact of the meeting should not be disclosed to Harris or Anderson .
However , by the 2nd March when Mr. James was at Manson \ 's office , he received a telephone call from THS to the effect that THS had discovered that both Harris and Anderson had learnt of the meeting .
The collection claim form was duly lodged by Manson with the LPSO whose Chatham office processed it on the 14th March .
The content of this latter meeting later became a matter of considerable dispute -LRB- see below -RRB- but in any event Mr. James was convinced that it would be appropriate to instruct Brocklehurst to investigate the matter further .
Contemporaneously , Brocklehurst reported to Mr. James of the outcome of their investigations .
This was to the effect that the First Claimant had been convicted under the name of O \ ` Callaghan at the Old Bailey in January 1976 of robbery and of possession of a firearm with intent .
On the 1st February 1995 the Claimants gave notice to proceed , presumably , as the Court of Appeal observed in a judgment referred to below , in the light of the House of Lords decision in Pan Atlantic -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 A.C. 501 .
It was to the effect that the First Defendant knew of the conviction on or about the 21st March when a member of Brocklehurst told Mr. James about it during a long lunch that day having derived the information from solicitors to the Metropolitan Police .
This was similarly on the basis that , as a result of information from Brocklehurst given at the lunch , `` Mr James knew that the cover could be repudiated but was restrained from disclosing the fact of conviction until further proof was obtained '' .
The judgment of Lord Justice Evans then went on : - `` No question as to the degree of knowledge that is necessary was raised either as part of the preliminary issue nor before May J. nor at the hearing before his HHJ Wilcox nor in the course of this appeal until the matter was raised by the Court .
\ xc2 \ x85 `` The information was given to Mr James with a sufficient degree of certainty , to make him decide that Brocklehurst should be instructed and that Thomas Howell Selfe \ 's instruction should be withdrawn .
The only other matter of background that perhaps merits some comment is that since the hearing before HHJ Wilcox and the Court of Appeal , the underwriting file of Mr. James has been found and disclosed .
It follows , that in conducting business under such an arrangement , Manson \ 's status was as agents of the insured , both in respect of placement of risk and collection of claims ; Rozanes \ xc2 \ x96v - Bowen -LSB- 1928 -RSB- 32 L.L.R .
This practice has been roundly criticised by the courts : see Anglo African Merchants Ltd \ xc2 \ x96v - Bayley -LSB- 1969 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 268 and North and South Trust Company \ xc2 \ x96v - Berkeley -LSB- 1971 -RSB- 1 WLR 470 .
Further , when Mr. James sought to place Mansons in the invidious position of not disclosing to Anderson or their ultimate client the proposed meeting between Harris and THS , the word got out very quickly perhaps by virtue of Mansons duly disclosing the true position .
In my view the position is that , having made an unequivocal representation that the information placed before New India had been amended in the respects set out in the schedule and bordereaux , , Mr. Patel was obliged to retract that representation if he did not intend New India to be bound by it , once Mr. Patel had appreciated the effect of the documents and had obtained knowledge of the facts given rise to the right to elect , I would hold , therefore , that , once Mr. Patel had obtained such knowledge and had failed within an reasonable time to countermand the endorsement , he must be held to be making a continuing representation on behalf of New India that the information material to the reinsurance was as set out in the schedule and bordereaux and that , by doing so , he elected not to exercise the right to avoid the contract on the basis of such information '' .
It is true that Manson were invited to tell the adjusters `` To proceed in the normal manner '' in October and this was passed on as an instruction `` To proceed to settlement '' which in turn THS communicated to Harris as indicating that underwriters were `` prepared to deal with this claim under the terms of the policy in force '' .
\ r \ n The decision in Royscot Trust v. Rogerson has become of all the greater moment for any claim under section 2 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Act in the light of recent developments in the law of damages to be found in particular in two House of Lords decisions , those of Banque Bruxelles Lambert SA v. Eagle Star Insurance Co sub nom South Australia Asset Management Corporation v. York Montague Ltd -LSB- 1997 -RSB- AC 191 and Smith New Court Securities Ltd v. Citibank NA -LSB- 1997 -RSB- AC 254 .
\ r \ n In Smith New Court v. Citibank , however , the House of Lords confirmed that fraud is different and that damages are at large , both foreseeable and unforeseeable , provided only that they are directly caused by entering into the transaction induced by the fraud .
Lord Browne-Wilkinson -LRB- at 267F -RRB- reserved the question , expressing no view , whether Royscot Trust v. Rogerson was correct to apply the same measure of loss -LRB- in accordance with the then existing rule in Doyle v. Olby -LRB- Ironmongers -RRB- Ltd -LSB- 1969 -RSB- 2 QB 158 -RRB- to damages for innocent misrepresentation under the Act .
And Lord Steyn -LRB- at 282H/283C -RRB- said this : \ r \ n `` In Royscot Trust Ltd. v. Rogerson -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 2 QB 297 the Court of Appeal held that under section 2 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Misrepresentation Act 1967 damages in respect of an honest but careless misrepresentation are to be calculated as if the representation had been made fraudulently .
The second case is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Downs v. Chappell -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 WLR 426 .
The narrower measure of damages in negligence would be important in this case , were the rule in Royscot Trust v. Rogerson ever to change , because Mr John Rowland QC accepts on behalf of the claimants that they are unable to prove any loss flowing from the alleged misrepresentations other than has been caused from the acts of entering into the binding authorities themselves .
When , moreover , it is considered that the test of causation is inducement , that the misrepresentation need not be the sole or decisive inducement as long as it materially contributed to the decision of the representee to enter into the contract -LRB- Edgington v. Fitzmaurice -LRB- 1885 -RRB- 29 Ch D 459 , Pan Atlantic Insurance Co Ltd v. Pine Top Insurance Co -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 AC 501 -RRB- , and that a material misrepresentation , ie one likely to influence a reasonable man , sets up a presumption or inference -LRB- of fact , not law -RRB- that the claimant has been induced , subject to rebuttal the burden of which is on the defendant -LRB- Redgrave v. Hurd -LRB- 1881 -RRB- 20 Ch D 1 at 21 , as explained by Lord Blackburn in Smith v. Chadwick -LRB- 1884 -RRB- 9 App Cas 187 at 196 -RRB- , it can be appreciated what a mighty weapon lies in section 2 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Act .
\ r \ n As for the inducement , JEB Fasteners Ltd v. Marks Bloom & Co -LSB- 1983 -RSB- 1 All ER 583 illustrates the limitations of the doctrine of partial inducement -LRB- albeit that was a case in Hedley Byrne misrepresentation in which context it has been said that the term denoting causation is properly speaking reliance and not inducement : Downs v. Chappel -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 WLR 426 at 433 , Bristol and West Building Society v. Mothew -LSB- 1998 -RSB- Ch 1 at 11 -RRB- .
Then in 1963 in Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v. Heller and Partners Ltd -LSB- 1964 -RSB- AC 465 the House of Lords made it plain that a duty of care to avoid negligent misstatements could arise between persons in a special relationship and breach of that duty could found recovery in damages .
To take one example : it is the pressure of dishonesty which led to the doctrine that statements of opinion or as to the future can be read as containing an implied statement of present fact as to a person \ 's beliefs or intentions : see eg Edgington v. Fitzmaurice -LRB- `` the state of a man \ 's mind is as much a fact as the state of his digestion '' per Bowen LJ at 483 , a case of fraud -RRB- .
That doctrine has led in turn to the implication that a representor has reasonable grounds for his statement of belief or intention : see eg Brown v. Raphael -LSB- 1958 -RSB- Ch 636 , where the court of appeal stressed that the representor was in a far better position to ascertain the facts than the representee .
As a result of the settlement of the so-called Lloyd \ 's litigation concluding in the Reinsurance and Run-off Contract made on 3 September 1996 -LRB- `` R&R '' -RRB- , these claims brought by names on Lloyd \ 's syndicates against the brokers were assigned to Equitas Reinsurance Ltd -LRB- `` ERL '' -RRB- and thence under the Retrocession Agreement also made on 3 September 1996 by ERL to Equitas Limited -LRB- `` Equitas '' -RRB- .
The opening of Phillips J \ 's judgment in that case is worth citing : \ r \ n `` 1988 , 1989 and 1990 were bad years for Lloyd \ 's .
\ r \ n The very great expansion in the number of names seeking quotations from the Robert Fraser scheme in these years necessitated certain changes in the procedure of assessment on the part of the brokers and Mr Broad .
\ r \ n The written presentations formed an important part of the broker \ 's marketing of the scheme to potential underwriters of it , but Mr Roxburgh and Mr Seel also held meetings with representations of each of the claimants , and encouraged them to meet Mr Broad .
\ r \ n Thus , Mr Roxburgh and Mr Seel met Mr Ronald Thomas , Avon \ 's underwriting manager , in August 1989 , at which time the 1990 presentation booklet was handed over .
Mr Thomas handed the booklet over to Mr Sidney Gibson , Avon \ 's commercial assistant manager , who tested the proposal from a technical point of view working on the claims \ ' figures provided and making projections about maximum losses .
The two of them considered the proposal together , and ultimately a decision to participate was taken by Mr John Murray , Avon \ 's general manager , on Mr Thomas \ 's recommendation .
\ r \ n In the case of Trygg-Hansa , a short meeting in Monte Carlo at the end of September 1989 , at which the 1990 presentation was handed over , was followed up by a longer meeting in London on 18 October between Mrs Gudrun Stenfors , then a regional manager within Trygg-Hansa \ 's reinsurance division , and Messrs Roxburgh and Seel .
The 1991 presentation was handed over to Mr Peter O \ ` Neill , group property manager , at a meeting n November 1990 .
A report on that meeting by Mr O \ ` Neill \ 's colleague , Mr Peter Dawkins , said that Mr Broad `` vets every application personally '' .
On 3 December 1990 Mr O \ ` Neill wrote a note to Mr Brian Connell , the assistant general manager , recommending a participation in the Robert Fraser scheme -LRB- and in two other PSL schemes -RRB- .
Mr Connell in turn passed on the 1991 presentation to Mr David Pinnell , with his and Mr O \ ` Neill \ 's joint recommendation .
Mr Roxburgh and Mr Seel first sought to interest Provincial in the Robert Fraser scheme in 1989 , when they went to see Mr Colin Dearlove , who had responsibility for `` special risks '' , and gave him their 1990 presentation .
This report , in fuller amplification of Mr Dearlove \ 's manuscript notes made at the meeting itself , is useful for it is contemporaneous evidence of how Mr Roxburgh and Mr Seel would present their business case .
The initial contact was between Mr Christian Hesselmann , Vesta \ 's general manager , and Mr Seel in Monte Carlo in September 1990 : Mr Seel gave Mr Hesselmann a copy of the 1991 presentation .
Mr Flaaten met Mr Roxburgh and Mr Seel in London in October 1990 .
Mr Broad agreed that you could not use history to project the future : what he was looking for , however , was to identify the types of syndicates that were operating in fields were profits could be of an erratic nature , such as heavy involvement in US catastrophe business : in such a field five good years \ ' profits could end in a nasty loss .
He also pointed out that the 1991 hit list : contained syndicates that he recalls having liked , such as Devereese -LRB- 228 -RRB- , Dodson -LRB- 660 -RRB- , Caudle -LRB- 760 -RRB- and Coffey -LRB- 902 -RRB- ; and did not contain syndicates that he recalls having disliked , such as Sturge , Forrest , Lissenden and Merrett .
Mr Rowland wanted to argue in the first place that the 1991 hit list was a list of syndicates to avoid and may be representative of lists for other years which have not survived ; and in the alternative that Mr Broad was lying about hit lists altogether .
But such lists would have been short ones and easily borne in mind : both Mr Broad and Mr Roxburgh said that as such they were not formally drawn up , in part out of concern for confidentiality , although Mr Broad may have made personal notes for himself .
I asked Mr Roxburgh about this and he said that generally the deletion was made by the brokers , but that this covered situations both where the deletion was made in advance of seeing Mr Broad but pursuant to underwriting principles agreed with him , and where the deletion was made in the presence of Mr Broad following discussion with him .
Typical examples of such suggestions might take the following forms : \ r \ n \ tAn example from 1989 : -LSB- Core , tab2 9 , p37 , Bannatyne -RSB- \ t `` 50,000 x/s 25,000 - 1850 1950 \ t100 ,000 x/s 25,000 - 2500 2850 \ t100 ,000 x/s 37,500 - 1875 2075 '' \ tAn example from 1990 : -LSB- Core , tab 10 , p182 , Buchanan -RSB- \ t `` 50,000 x/s 50,000 - 1950 2096 \ t100 ,000 x/s 50,000 - 2750 2956 \ t100 ,000 x/s 75,000 - 1825 1962 '' \ tAn example from 1991 : -LSB- Core , tab 14 , p2 , Davis -RSB- \ t `` 100/69 ,500 - 3000 3300 \ t200/69 ,500 - 3700 4085 \ t100/104 ,250 - 2250 2650 \ t200/104 ,250 - 2900 3395 '' Thus in 1990 and 1991 three -LSB- 18 -RSB- quotations would be provided , of which typically two would be for \ xc2 \ xa3100 ,000 cover at different excess points , and a third would be for some lower level of cover .
The claimants have identified 96 -LRB- out of 586 -RRB- risks bound in 1989 scratched by Mr Tunstall , and 224 -LRB- out of 1,524 -RRB- risks bound in 1990 scratched by Mr Bunn .
Similar sentiments were expressed by other witnesses -LRB- see for instance Mr Gibson of Avon at para 6.2 of his statement and Mr Flaaten of Vesta at para 6 of his -RRB- .
\ r \ n Mr Rowland did , however , seek to submit , by reference to some detailed work performed by the claimants \ ' expert witness Mr Richard Lawrence , that the rating of the risks was simply arbitrary .
\ r \ n Ultimately Mr Rowland made little use of Mr Lawrence \ 's workings in his final submissions .
\ r \ n In the circumstances I do not propose myself to go much into the details of Mr Lawrence \ 's workings : but I will seek to give the flavour of them , and to do so by reference to the inferences which Mr Rowland asked me to draw in his Inferences document .
Thus the sixth example -LRB- # 19 , Pilkington -RRB- should read a quoted rate of \ xc2 \ xa32 ,849 -LRB- net -RRB- compared with a guideline rate of \ xc2 \ xa32 ,600 -LRB- gross -RRB- , and the seventh example -LRB- ~ 20 , Owen -RRB- should read a quoted rate of \ xc2 \ xa32 ,825 -LRB- net -RRB- as against a guideline rate of \ xc2 \ xa32 ,750 -LRB- gross -RRB- .
\ r \ n The closest Mr Lawrence or Mr Rowland came to showing any incoherency or arbitrariness in rating was in a small number of examples of so-called `` inversions '' where two separate risks with a similar API show divergent rates at different excess levels .
Thus in 1990 three risks , each of which had a total API of \ xc2 \ xa3250 ,000 , carried suggested ratings -LRB- of which the final suggestions were scratched as quotes -RRB- as follows : \ r \ n Broome : 50/25 - 2200 - 2365 \ xc2 \ xa0 100/25 - 2800 - 3010 \ xc2 \ xa0 100/37 .5 - 1600 - 1720 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Caplan : 5/25 - 2010 - 2160 \ xc2 \ xa0 100/25 - 2600 - 2795 \ xc2 \ xa0 100/37 .5 - 1850 - 1980 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 Johnston : 50/25 - 2000 - 2150 \ xc2 \ xa0 100/25 - 2600 - 2795 \ xc2 \ xa0 100/37 .5 - 2100 - 2258 Thus , at \ xc2 \ xa350 ,000 or \ xc2 \ xa3100 ,000 cover excess of \ xc2 \ xa325 ,000 Mr Broome was quoted a higher rate than Mr Caplan or Mr Johnston , whereas at \ xc2 \ xa3100 ,000 cover excess of \ xc2 \ xa337 ,500 Mr Broome was quoted a lower rate .
Mr Rowland put to Mr Roxburgh that that may have been true in early years but that by 1989 the growth of the scheme had been such that detailed assessment was no longer practical .
In my judgment they failed totally to show that , and the evidence of Mr Broad and Mr Roxburgh was to the contrary and was supported by the documentary material .
I accept that the brokers and Mr Broad followed to a greater or lesser degree the results of syndicates as published in Chatset , ALM league tables and syndicate reports and accounts .
\ r \ n Avon was represented by Mr Thomas and Mr Gibson .
Mr Thomas put the point by reference to the fact that Mr Broad was an insider -LRB- at para 7 of his statement -RRB- ; \ r \ n `` What was important to me was that an acceptable leading underwriter would assess risks individually , and that the lead should be someone inside the Lloyd \ 's market who knew more than the Avon underwriters about individual syndicates and the risks they presented .
It was only in re-examination that , in answer to leading questions from Mr Rowland regarding the underwriting criteria at page 4 of the booklets , Mr Thomas said that he relied on that description of the underwriting process , and Mr Gibson said that it was critical to his decision .
Mr Gibson did not there mention historical results -LRB- as distinct from assessment of syndicates and excess -RRB- , and only Mr Thomas mentioned the importance of the analysis and grading of historical results .
\ r \ n Mr O \ ` Neill of Iron Trades in his statement also identified individual assessment by Mr Broad as a key feature without which Iron Trades would not have participated in the scheme .
The owners had chartered their vessel Solon to the Charterers under a charterparty on that standard form dated 11 July 1996 for a voyage from Paranagua , Brazil to Algiers , Algeria with a cargo of sugar .
The parties agreed to refer their dispute to the sole arbitriment of Mr Schofield , a distinguished London Maritime Arbitrator and the author of a much used text book on laytime and demurrage .
However in an award made by other London arbitrators -LRB- summarised in Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Maritime Newsletter 481 -RRB- other arbitrators had held that clause 28 did not interrupt the running of laytime ; those arbitrators noted that their decision might run counter to a widely held belief but it followed not only from their view of the wording of the charterparty but also from the decisions of the courts in the Kalliopi A , -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 101 , The Forum Craftsman and The Lefthero -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 109 on whether general exceptions clauses excused the charterers \ xc2 \ x92 liability in demurrage .
The second case was Larsen v Sylvester -LRB- 1908 -RRB- 96 LT 94 ; the vessel was delayed by congestion for 9 days whilst waiting to load ; she then loaded within the 84 hours allowed as laytime .
It is also clear that the Court of Appeal in that case considered that the Forum Craftsman could not be distinguished from the Kalliopi A on the basis that in the Forum Craftsman the period which was claimed to be excepted had begun only after the vessel was on demurrage .
They referred to a passage in the tenth edition of Professor Sir Guenter Treitel \ xc2 \ x92s treatise on the Law of Contract -LRB- 1999 -RRB- at p 205 ff where there is a discussion of the question of the seriousness of a breach of contract in relation to an exemption clause ; a difficult question remained unresolved as to the effect of the decisions in Suisse Atlantique and Photo Production Ltd v Securicor -LSB- 1980 -RSB- AC 827 on a number of cases where the seriousness of the breach had been a ground for holding an exemption clause did not apply .
The supplier was a British Aerospace subsidiary , Corporate Jets Limited , which has since been re-named British Aerospace -LRB- Lancaster House -RRB- Limited .
The letter asserted that the aircraft had serious defects in design and performance , and that the Government had been persuaded to buy it in preference to a Canadair Challenge 601 by British Aerospace with the assistance of the British High Commission in Tanzania .
Following the obtaining in about June 1997 of a copy of Raytheon \ 's letter of 24 June 1996 , the Government instructed United States counsel .
Marlon Aviation Inc of the United States and a London company Piper & Marbury Marine Legal Services Limited were instructed to assist with preparation .
For at the Parish Air Show in June 1997 a representative of Marlon had been in a position to ask a representative of Raytheon why there had been no answer to the Government \ 's letter to British Aerospace of 15 April 1996 .
It may be helpful to provide a brief summary of this history so the pattern can be seen : 1992 the contracts and delivery ; 1993 complaints and repairs , from May the aircraft in England , discussions with CIBC ; 1994 discussions with CIBC , termination ; warranty claims suggested ; 1995 aircraft sold ; 1996 legal advice on the purchase contract , letter to British Aerospace ; 1997 letter to High Commission , US advice ; 1998 pilot \ 's review of aircraft with Marlon , a \ ` course of action determined \ ' , writs issued , 1676 served ; 1999 1676 and 1819 served , applications issued .
In introducing the Bill in the House of Lords on 17 May 1966 -LRB- Report column 921 and following -RRB- the Lord Chancellor , Lord Gardiner , stated that : \ ` My Lords , this bill implements the recommendations of the Committee under five heads .
It is stated in the witness statement of Victoria Brown of Eversheds made on behalf of BAeLH as follows : \ ' 12 .
In addition Mr Cope recalls that the Claimant had an independent report prepared by its London based advisor , Bankers Trust .
\ ' The representations pleaded in the draft Points of Claim are : 1 \ tthat the aircraft was a high quality , state of the art , aircraft fitted with a modern avionics system ; 2 \ tthat it was the best replacement for the Government \ 's existing aircraft ; 3 \ tthat it would meet all the travel needs of the President , and in particular could land at small airports in Zanzibar and Tanzania ; 4 \ tthat it could carry up to 14 passengers in VIP comfort ; 5 \ tthat with a payload of 2,600 lbs .
It is clear from the combination of Biguzzi and Axa that the court is no longer concerned in these situations to consider prejudice in the sense of Birkett v James -LSB- 1978 -RSB- A.C. 297 , but the court will consider prejudice as part of its general enquiry as to what is just .
b ` HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE THOMAS There are before the court four questions of construction of an agreement for the manipulation -LRB- handling -RRB- of crude oil at the Greek port of Salonica -LRB- Thessaloniki -RRB- made in March 1993 between the Claimants -LRB- Jetoil -RRB- and the Defendants -LRB- Okta -RRB- who operate a refinery in Skopje , in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Background In the early 1970s OHIS , a state enterprise of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia engaged in the chemical business , decided to construct with the assistance of the USSR an oil refinery at Skopje which was in the then Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
\ tSubject of the present contract is receiving from tankers , storing and delivering crude oil which is OHIS \ xc2 \ x92s property into and out from the installations of -LSB- Jetoil -RSB- in Thessaloniki , Greece .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ xa2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0On 13 July 1984 addendum number 2 formally recorded that the replacement of OHIS by Refinery Skopje and of Jugopetrol by Makpetrol .
Although article 1 of the agreement stated that the crude oil was the property of OHIS -LRB- and therefore after 1982 of Refinery Skopje -RRB- , in practice the crude oil was all imported by Jugopetrol and Makpetrol ; the evidence of Mr Polenak -LRB- who was the manager of the company that acted as the shipping agent for the import of the crude -RRB- was that under the system of sate ownership in Yugoslavia in the 1970s and 1980s , the oil was in fact the property of the state and not OHIS ; article 1 of the contract reflected the fact that the oil was to be allocated to Refinery Skopje for processing .
1992 On 20 November 1992 , Macedonia declared itself independent of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and became known as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -LRB- Macedonia -RRB- .
Companies within Macedonia were faced with a new situation and Refinery Skopje and Makpetrol were no exception .
\ tAny dispute arising under or in connection with this agreement and which can not be amicably solved shall be referred to arbitration in London , English law will apply The amendment to the G Mamadakis 1979 agreement On 6 March 1993 , the 1979 agreement with G Mamadakis was amended by Refinery Skopje , G Mamadakis and Makpetrol ; the price for manipulation was to be US $ 4.00 for the period from 19 October 1992 to 31 December 1994 and both sides agreed that there were no penalties for the period up to 31 December 1992 .
Operation of the 1993 contract It was the evidence of Mr Kiriakos Mamadakis , Mr Moutsakis -LRB- manager of the Import and Export Department of G Mamadakis -RRB- , Mr Kardamakis and Mr Gouvatsos -LRB- who had worked for G Mamadakis from July 1960 to September 1998 and retained close contacts with that company and Jetoil -RRB- , that from the time of the 1993 agreement Jetoil manipulated all the oil imported by Refinery Skopje for its own account and G Mamadakis manipulated all crude oil purchased by Makpetrol .
The privatisation of the refinery In 1998 and 1999 , in circumstances which it is not necessary to examine in any detail , the Government of Macedonia considered various proposals to privatise the refinery at Skopje .
Eventually the Government of Macedonia decided that the consortium led by Hellenic Group should acquire a majority holding in Refinery Skopje which changed its name to Okta -LRB- the defendants to this action -RRB- .
It was also understood that the capacity of the refinery at Skopje , approximately 2.5 m metric tons per year , was considerably in excess of the annual consumption of Macedonia which was about 800,000 - 900,000 metric tons per year .
I accept his evidence that it was generally intended that the oil to be imported by Makpetrol would be imported by G Mamadakis and that the oil to be imported by Refinery Skopje would be imported by Jetoil ; it seems clear that no oil was in fact manipulated under the 1979 Jetoil agreement or the 1993 addendum except in the circumstances to which I have referred .
Although no oil was in fact shipped under the 1979 agreement or the addenda to that agreement , it was nonetheless anticipated in March 1993 that oil might be shipped under that agreement if in the uncertain situation then pertaining in Macedonia that proved necessary in the event that Refinery Skopje did not import oil for its own account .
It is , I have said , common ground that Refinery Skopje entered into competition with Makpetrol for the first time in 1993 and thus it is highly unlikely that they would have committed themselves to the importation of a minimum quantity of 500,000 metric tons , particularly given the fact that the total requirement of Macedonia was only 800,000 - 900,000 metric tons .
They referred me to Foley v Classique Coaches -LSB- 1934 -RSB- 2 KB 1 and May & Butcher v The King -LSB- 1934 -RSB- 2 KB 17 .
The aircraft was owned by the defendants -LRB- BWA -RRB- who had entered into an agreement on 24 December 1993 with the first claimants -LRB- the Post Office -RRB- to carry mail on a round trip from Edinburgh to Coventry five nights a week .
The mail to be carried was that provided by a subsidiary of the Post Office , the second claimant -LRB- Parcelforce -RRB- .
Parcelforce in its turn entered into contracts with the third to sixth claimants -LRB- Motorola , Burberrys , Wemyss Weavecraft and BT -RRB- for the carriage of parcels .
No distinction was made between Parcelforce and the Post Office for the purposes of these proceedings and it is therefore convenient to refer solely to the Post Office as the interested party .
As a result of the accident and the destruction of the parcels being carried , the Post Office settled claims made by Motorola , Burberrys , Wemyss Weavecraft and BT .
The terms of the tender made it clear that the Post Office was seeking tenders for the provision of an Air Charter Service between Scotland and Coventry .
It is therefore convenient next to refer to the general arrangements of the Post Office and the specific arrangements it had with Motorola , Burberrys , Wemyss Weavecraft and BT .
-LRB- \ tIn the case of Motorola , Burberrys , and Wemyss Weavecraft , the contract entered into was on the terms of the Royal Mail Parcelforce 24 and Parcelforce 48 terms and conditions -LRB- Parcelforce 24/48 terms -RRB- .
The payments made by the Post Office to the claimant customers For the purpose of the preliminary issue , it was agreed that after 26 April 1993 the Post Office directly provided insurance cover under their own insurance arrangements in respect of the loss or damage to parcels in transit ; this change was not notified to Motorola , Burberrys Wemyss Weavecraft , BT .
In 1967 Browne J decided in Moukataff v BOAC -LSB- 1967 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 396 that if mail was carried in an aircraft operated by a person other than the Post Office , there was no immunity in respect of a claim in tort brought against the operator of the aircraft by the owner of a packet which had been posted by mail .
The general legislative history of the Order is set out in the speech of Lord Bridge of Harwich in Holmes v Bangladesh Biman Corpn -LSB- 1989 -RSB- AC 1112 .
In American Express v British Airways -LSB- 1983 -RSB- 1 WLR 701 Lloyd J -LRB- as he then was -RRB- decided that the statutory immunity extended to a claim under the 1967 Order as such a claim was encompassed within the words \ xc2 \ x93proceedings in tort \ xc2 \ x94 .
The reference in the contract to schemes made under the Post Office Act It was common ground that clause 4 should be construed by reference to the surrounding circumstances and the principles set out in the judgment of Lord Hoffman in Investors Compensation Scheme Limited v West Bromwich Building Society -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR 896 at 912f to 913e .
-LRB- \ tMail would be carried under contracts which were entered into between the Post Office and their customers on Parcelforce 24/48 terms or on terms that might include the imposition of liability of the Post Office for loss or damage ; it was a feature of the Parcelforce 24/48 terms that inclusive insurance was provided up to a specified amount per item .
The position in relation to the other customer claimants However , in respect of the other customers which contracted with the Post Office -LRB- and possibly also BT on the assumed findings for the purpose of this preliminary issue -RRB- , the amount the Post Office paid was paid on the basis they were paying out \ xc2 \ x93the insurance cover which should have been arranged under clause 6.5 of the Parcelforce 24/48 terms \ xc2 \ x94 .
Indeed as clause 6.2 of those terms excluded the Post Office \ xc2 \ x92s liability , there was no other basis on which the Post Office would have paid Motorola , Burberrys and Wemyss Weavecraft .
BWA said that the sums paid to Motorola , Burberrys and Wemyss Weavecraft were not paid as compensation within the meaning of clause 4 , first because there was no obligation for the Post Office to pay and secondly that what was paid was a payment in lieu of the insurance cover which should have been obtained .
Considering the Parcelforce 24/48 terms as a whole , it is clear that the Post Office could only withdraw the insurance arrangements if it gave notice to its customers .
As it is to be assumed for the purpose of this preliminary issue that no notice was given , I am satisfied that the Post Office was bound to compensate Motorola , Burberrys and Wemyss Weavecraft on the basis that insurance should have been obtained .
They pointed to the fact that under clause 6.2 of the Parcelforce 24/48 terms , the Post Office excluded all liability for loss or damage for the parcels ; the Post Office could never therefore have been liable to pay compensation for parcels carried under the Parcelforce 24/48 terms .
Instead , the Post Office had agreed to arrange insurance up to a specified sum per parcel ; under clause 6.7 of the Parcelforce 24/48 terms , the Post Office stated that they did not act as insurers , but had arranged a facility with insurance underwriters .
Thus , in the result , in my view on the assumed findings that have been agreed for the purpose of this preliminary issue , the Post Office are not entitled to recover the sums that have been paid to Motorola , Burberrys or Wemyss Weavecraft .
However , if the sums paid to BT were not in fact paid solely on the basis that insurance had not been obtained under the Parcelforce 24/48 terms , but on the basis that the Post Office was or might have been liable for negligence under its contract with BT , the Post Office is entitled to recover the monies paid to BT subject to the per item limit .
This can be done under three headings : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThe manner in which the statutory regime applies It is clear from the decisions of the House of Lords in Sidhu v British Airways Plc -LSB- 1997 -RSB- AC430 and Herd v Clyde Helicopters -LSB- 1997 -RSB- AC 534 that where the Conventions apply , they create an exclusive right of action and resort can not be had to other forms of action .
However , as a result of the two decisions at the House of Lords to which I have referred in the preceding paragraph , the question decided by Gatehouse J was reconsidered in 1999 by David Steel J in Western Digital Corporation v British Airways -LSB- 1999 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 380 .
Furthermore as far as the customers -LRB- Motorola , Burberrys , Wemyss Weavecraft or BT -RRB- were concerned , it was a matter entirely for the Post Office whether it sent their goods by air or by road or by rail .
Conclusion On the assumed facts for the purpose of the preliminary issue therefore : -LRB- \ tI hold that the Post Office was not entitled under the contract to recover the sums paid to Motorola , Burberrys or Wemyss Weavecraft as these were paid out in lieu of the insurance which it should have obtained .
Justice Laddie : This is an application -LRB- \ ` the Respondents \ ' Application \ ' -RRB- by the Respondents , Mr. Malcolm Cohen and Mr. Raymond Hocking , both of BDO Stoy Hayward , to strike out or stay certain parts of an application to the Companies Registrar brought by the applicant , Holdenhurst Securities Plc -LRB- \ ` the Holdenhurst Application \ ' -RRB- .
Its trustees are David and Wolfe Peterman , Wolfe \ 's wife Gwendoline Peterman and a professional trustee , Buckingham Trustees .
He asserted that -LRB- i -RRB- Holdenhurst owed the Pension Scheme \ xc2 \ xa3863 ,538 -LRB- `` the Pension Scheme Debt '' -RRB- and -LRB- ii -RRB- Wimbledon owed Holdenhurst some \ xc2 \ xa3885 ,583 by way of intercompany debt under Clause 4.2 of the Transfer Agreement -LRB- `` the InterCompany Debt '' -RRB- .
Correspondence failed to resolve the dispute between the parties and , on 9 April 1999 , Messrs Zatman & Co , solicitors for Holdenhurst , wrote to BDO Stoy Hayward as follows : \ r \ t `` We write this letter to advise that we intend commencing proceedings for recovery of the inter-Company debt .
Mr. Tamlin , who appears for the Respondents , says that the first two paragraphs of the Holdenhurst Application are only an attempt by the Petermans to side step the need to obtain leave of the Court under s. 11 -LRB- 3 -RRB- -LRB- d -RRB- .
\ r Mr. Tamlin has drawn my attention to Port v Auger -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 W.L.R .
I do not think that Port v Auger helps Mr. Hamlin on the Respondents \ ' Application .
It will be for Mr. Tamlin and his clients to decide whether , in view of the fact that Holdenhurst has no assets , it would be appropriate to make an application for security .
Powell and Partners Limited -LRB- Powell -RRB- , insurance agents at Leigh-on-Sea , for insurance on the yacht .
Armada required a survey and valuation prior to cover ; the Claimants instructed Geoffrey Minshull , a Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s approved surveyor in Majorca to conduct the survey .
In his survey report dated 1June 1996 he described the yacht as a Motor sailer/Gaff Ketch rig which had been built in Fife in 1923 ; she was teak planked on oak frames with a laid teak deck and powered by a General Motors diesel engine .
On 13 June 1998 , the Claimants contend a fire broke out on the vessel whilst she was on a voyage from Port of Figura Da Foz , Portugal to La Corunna , Spain .
In Wilson v Nelson -LRB- 1864 -RRB- Q.B.N.S .
The editors cite as authority for that proposition the decision of Wright J in Loders & Nucoline Ltd v the Bank of New Zealand -LRB- 1929 -RRB- 33 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 70 ; but there is nothing , in my view , in that case which supports the proposition .
\ tThe judgments in Wilson v Nelson draw a careful distinction between the sum insured and what is required if there is to be a valued policy .
\ n I was also referred to the decisions in Blascheck v Bussell -LRB- 1916 -RRB- 33 TLR 74 and Re Freesman and Royal Insurance Co. of Canada -LRB- 1986 -RRB- 29 DLR -LRB- 4th -RRB- 621 where the courts took the view that the sum stated in the policy was the sum insured and not an agreed value .
There are at least two principal reasons why such policies are used : Agreement on valuation avoids disputes over valuation in the event of loss -LRB- see Barker v Janson -LRB- 1868 -RRB- LR 3 CP 303 and , in particular , the judgment of Montague Smith J at p. 307 -RRB- .
The wording used was indistinguishable from that considered by the High Court of Australia in British Traders Insurance Company v Monson .
It occurred in the Atlantic some 250 miles of Portugal in good visibility .
`` Ya Mawlaya '' had loaded a cargo of soyabeans at Destrahan , Louisiana and was destined for Ancona and Porto Marghera .
This collision and the subsequent loss of life and damage has resulted in much litigation in the USA , particularly in Louisiana .
There has also been litigation in Hong Kong , India and England .
It was represented at the hearing before me by Mr Boyd QC and Miss Blanchard .
\ r B. \ tProceedings in various jurisdictions On 30 December 1994 World Tanker began proceedings in a US Federal Court , which was the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana in New Orleans .
Subsequently , in September 1995 , the Hong Kong court stayed all proceedings there on the ground that Louisiana was clearly the more appropriate forum .
\ r On 12 May 1995 the managers of `` Ya Mawlaya '' began proceedings against World Tanker in India , claiming limitation of liability , an indemnity from the owners of the vessel and an anti - suit injunction to stop the Louisiana proceedings .
World Tanker applied to Judge Lemmon in the Louisiana court for an anti - suit injunction to stop Kara Mara proceeding with this limitation action .
But on 8 April 1999 Judge Lemmon refused World Tanker \ 's application on the ground that it had not been shown that the Louisiana judgment on liability -LRB- referred to below -RRB- , which had been handed down on 3 March 1999 , would not be shown proper respect .
\ r On 23 July 1998 the Judge in charge of the Louisiana liability proceedings , Judge Lemmon , ordered sanctions against Kara Mara , holding that it was now clear that Kara Mara had made a conscious decision to ignore the court .
The H&M underwriters of `` Ya Mawlaya '' protested to the Louisiana Court that they were not then party to any Louisiana proceedings and that the Direct Action Statute had no application in the present case \ x02 .
Despite this , Judge Lemmon ordered , on 16 September 1998 , that the H&M underwriters should shew cause why they should not put up security to the limits of the policy .
The findings of fact and law \ x02 included the following : \ r -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ t `` Ya Mawlaya '' was unseaworthy with the privity of Kara Mara upon departure from New Orleans ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tno or inadequate repairs were made to the bridge equipment of `` Ya Mawlaya '' including the radar and HVF radios , before her departure ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- \ ther officers were incompetent ; -LRB- 4 -RRB- \ ta `` one man watch system '' , which was not permissible , was in operation on board `` Ya Mawlaya '' ; -LRB- 5 -RRB- \ t `` Ya Mawlaya '' failed to comply with the Collision Regulations ; -LRB- 6 -RRB- \ tKara Mara , whilst `` thumbing their noses '' at the Louisiana court , had embarked on a `` forum shopping spree '' in India and Hong Kong .
\ x02 D. \ tThe aftermath of the judgment in the Louisiana liability action On 1 April 1999 World Tanker \ 's New York lawyers , Haight Gardner , wrote to the London solicitors for the YM Insurers -LRB- Hill Taylor Dickinson - `` HTD '' -RRB- and informed them that as Louisiana was a `` direct action '' jurisdiction , World Tanker could now claim directly from the YM Insurers for `` some proportion and perhaps all of the judgment '' .
US$ 4.5 million , less sums already paid ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tThat the YM Insurers were not liable to the assureds to pay legal costs -LRB- under Clause 8.3 of the ITC -RRB- unless they had been incurred with the prior written consent of the YM Insurers or they had been incurred or were payable under compulsion in contesting or limiting liability and that the YM Insurers were not liable to pay the sum of US$ 5,317,882.05 in respect of legal costs in India and Hong Kong which Kara Mara had been ordered by Judge Lemmon to pay to World Tanker in the Louisiana Liability proceedings ; -LRB- 4 -RRB- \ tThat the YM Insurers were not liable under the H&M policies to indemnify the assured against any liability for loss of life and personal injury ; liability for loss of or damage to cargo laden on board `` Ya Mawlaya '' ; or liability for the removal or disposal of cargo from `` Ya Mawlaya '' .
The Complaint asserts that all the YM Insurers -LRB- and the remaining insurers not involved in the current English proceedings -RRB- do business in Louisiana or the USA .
First , on 14 December 1999 Judge Lemmon approved the citation of the YM Insurers as garnishees of sums due from the H&M policy insurers to the assureds under those policies .
The alternative basis stated is that the YM Insurers have an equitable right not to be subjected to `` vexatious , oppressive and unconscionable proceedings '' in any courts other than those of England and Wales which seek any relief based on the H&M Policies that is connected with the collision .
The first was that World Tanker should be enjoyed from pursuing any proceedings anywhere in the world other than the Courts of England and Wales from pursuing any relief in relation to the liability of the YM Insurers on the H&M Policies in respect of the collision .
\ r In relation to the proposed amendment to the Application Notice for an interim anti - suit injunction , World Tanker objected to the fact that the injunction now sought was much wider , a it sought to enjoin any proceedings throughout the world , rather than just in the USA or Louisiana .
\ tThe arguments of the YM Insurers are as follows : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tIn the Direct Action claim in Louisiana World Tanker asserts a right to make a claim under the H&M Policies directly against the YM Insurers World Tanker claims that it can do so under Louisiana law by virtue of a statutory right of action conferred on it by the Louisiana Direct Action Statute .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tThe YM Insurers , being a party to the H&M Policies , are entitled not to be subjected to proceedings of any nature in any Courts other than those of England or Wales where a party claims relief connected with alleged liability of the YM Insurers to their assureds under those polices in relation to the collision If World Tanker made any claim under the H&M Policies , then it should be bound by all the terms , including the EJC .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tEven if the English Court should regard the Louisiana Enforcement Proceedings by World Tanker as effectively making claims on the H&M Policies which are subject to an EJC , nonetheless the English Court must place itself in the position of the Louisiana Court and consider whether , in the context of the Direct Action Statute , the EJC would be enforced .
In South Carolina Insurance Co v Assurantie Maatschappij `` de Zeven Provincien '' NV -LSB- 1987 -RSB- AC 24 , Lord Brandon of Oakbrook said that the English Courts had power to grant an anti - suit injunction even in cases where no legal or equitable right had been infringed or was threatened and even when the actions of the party bringing the foreign proceedings was not `` unconscionable '' : see page 40F \ x02 .
In subsequent cases in which the House of Lords or the Privy Council has considered the juridical basis for the grant of anti - suit injunctions , they have made it clear that the remedy of an injunction is available because some legal or equitable right is or may be infringed by the foreign proceedings that the claimant wishes to restrain .
I think that this is the effect of the analysis in the Aerospatiale case -LRB- see footnote below -RRB- ; Channel Tunnel Group Ltd v Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd -LSB- 1993 -RSB- AC 335 at B-D per Lord Mustill ; \ x02 Mercedes - Benz AG v Leiduck -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 AC 284 at 310G-H per Lord Nicholls ; \ x02 and Airbus Industrie GIE v Patel -LSB- 1999 -RSB- 1 AC 119 at 133E and 134F per Lord Goff of Chieveley .
In the most recent statement of the principles upon which the English courts will grant anti - suit injunctions , the House of Lords \ ' decision in Airbus Industrie GIE v Patel -LSB- 1999 -RSB- 1 AC 119 , Lord Goff of Chieveley drew a distinction between `` alternative forum '' cases and `` single forum '' cases .
\ r In my view the analysis of the Court of Appeal in DVA v Voest must apply also in relation to an EJC .
Mr Boyd for World Tanker accepts that , in the Direct Action Claim , the Louisiana Court would be bound to construe the H&M Policies according to English law principles in the first place , but he submits that this does not mean that World Tanker would , in the eyes of the Louisiana courts , be bound by the EJC .
\ x02 Mr Boyd submits that if the Louisiana Courts were to give effect to the EJC then it would defeat the whole object of the Direct Action Statute , therefore it would not do so .
So in principle I would reject Mr Boyd \ 's submission that I should consider the nature of the claim by World Tanker under the Direct Action Statute through `` Louisiana law spectacles '' .
\ r I also think that this was the approach of the Court of Appeal in DVA v Voest .
The cargo was damaged on a voyage from Brazil to Bangkok .
This is because it was accepted by Mr Boyd for World Tanker that the Louisiana court would , in the first place , construe the H&M Policies according to English law .
\ x02 But in my view , contrary to the submission of Mr Boyd , there is no reason why the English court should have regard to the Louisiana law concept of whether an EJC in favour of the English courts is lawful , at least when , upon an English conflicts of laws analysis , the contract is governed by English law .
\ x02 And in Akai v People \ 's Insurance Co -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 90 , Thomas J disregarded the fact that the Australian High Court would not have given effect to the EJC in the insurance contract .
\ x02 In argument Mr Boyd did accept that all three sets of proceedings were brought to enforce the judgment in the Louisiana Liability Proceedings .
Mr Boyd advanced arguments that there were good reasons under Louisiana law why World Tanker should not be held bound by the EJC in the H&M Policies .
Mr Body did not suggest that , in relation to this particular point , there were distinctions in the position of World Tanker on each of the three Enforcement proceedings in Louisiana .
\ r The third argument of Mr Boyd is another way of saying that the English Court should do nothing to prevent the Louisiana Courts from enforcing the Direct Action Statute That would be a powerful argument if there were no EJC in favour of the English Courts .
This strict rule was recently reconfirmed by the Court of Appeal in DVA v Voest : see page 290 per Hobhouse LJ .
\ x02 But Staughton LJ pointed out in Kuwait Oil Tanker Co SAR v Al Bader -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 WLR 1410 at 1418 - 9 that the attitude of the Court of Appeal seemed to have been modified by the majority judgments \ x02 in Golden Ocean Assurance Ltd v Martin -LRB- The `` Goldean Mariner '' -RRB- -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 215 .
First he says that the English proceedings for a declaration will serve no useful purpose , because World Tanker is not pursuing its claims under the Direct Action Statute or the Garnishee or State Action in England , but in Louisiana .
Mr Boyd submits that the Louisiana Courts must be the natural forum for the resolution of claims for enforcement of the Louisiana Liability judgment and in particular for claims under the Direct Action Statute .
Once again I think that the problem with Mr Boyd \ 's submission is that it ignores the facts that -LRB- i -RRB- World Tanker is asserting a claim in Louisiana under the Direct Action Statute on the H&M Policies asserts other claims concerning the H&M Policies in the other Enforcement Proceedings ; and -LRB- ii -RRB- that I have held that the YM Insurers have a good arguable case for enforcing the EJC by means of an anti - suit injunction .
Mr Boyd was unable to rely on any case in which the Court has refused permission to serve out of the jurisdiction under Order 11 Rule 1 -LRB- or the new CPR -RRB- where there is an enforceable EJC in favour of the English Courts and the claimant seeks a negative declaration in the English proceedings .
Bundle 3/page 347 \ tIt seems that the Italian insurers participating in the two H&M policies did not plead to the merits of the claim at this stage but are contesting jurisdiction and forum conveniens in the Direct Action Claim : Marsh 3 : Bundle 1/Tab 14/page 123 para 9 .
\ tThe original version of the Application Notice had only sought to restrain World Tanker from pursuing their claims `` in the Courts of the USA '' generally and then specifically identified the three Louisiana proceedings .
\ r \ tSet out in the letter from Mr Boyd QC and Miss Blanchard dated 10 February 2000 .
\ tThe other members of the House of Lords agreed with Lord Brandon , although Lord Goff of Chieveley preferred to regard the grant of an anti - suit injunction as `` one example of circumstances in which , in the interests of justice , the power to grant an injunction may be exercised '' : see page 44H See Societe Nationale Industrielle Aerosaptiale v Lee Kui Jak -LSB- 1987 -RSB- AC 871 at 892B per Lord Goff of Chieveley \ tThat case was dealing with the power of the court to grant an interlocutory injunction in the context of a dispute that fell within an arbitration clause .
\ r \ tWhich was adopted and approved by the Court of Appeal in DVA v Voest : see the judgment of Hobhouse LJ at page 287 .
\ r \ tThe second and third points are also dealt with in the Seaconsar case : see pages 455E and 457A , per Lord Goff of Chieveley .
Leggatt J \ 's decision was approved in the second stage of that litigation sub non : Firma C-Trade SA v Newcastle P&I Association -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 2 AC 1 at page 33B per Lord Goff of Chieveley .
\ r \ tTheir analysis had relied , by analogy , upon the restatement of the test for renewing writs under Order 6 Rule 8 as stated by Lord Brandon in the House of Lords \ ' decision in : Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Barbrak Ltd -LRB- The `` Myrto '' No 3 -RRB- -LSB- 1987 -RSB- AC 597 at 619E .
7415 -RRB- and having a place of business at PO Box 166 , Riyadh 11411 , Saudi Arabia .
On 21 May 1997 HCN nominated Mr Anthony Murray as their arbitrator ; he was at the time a partner in a firm of solicitors in Glasgow but has since become a partner of a firm of solicitors in London .
On 22 July 1997 Dr Nader Gangi was nominated by Pearson Lowe solicitors instructed by Mr Pharaon and the Company as the arbitrator for the respondents to the arbitration ; where it is not clear to me whether any distinction was being made between the Establishment , the Company and Mr Pharaon , I shall refer to the other party to the arbitration as the Respondents .
\ n The law of Saudi Arabia It was common ground that the question of whether the Company had become party to the distributorship agreement -LRB- and therefore to the arbitration agreement -RRB- was governed by Saudi law .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tMr Pharaon said in a statement that was before the tribunal that he told Mr Stowell of HCN at the FMI exhibition in 1993 that the name Al Ameen Est would be changed to read Al Ameen Co ; however this evidence was no more than evidence of a change of name and not a change of the legal status of the person with whom HCN had done business and there was no evidence that the consent of HCN had been sought .
There was a meeting between Mr Pharaon and Mr Morgenthaler -LRB- representing HCN -RRB- at the FMI exhibition at Chicago in 1994 .
as before \ xc2 \ x94 , the offer was being made by Mr Pharaon that the Company should take on the old debt and that the Company should act as before .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tI do not find it surprising that Mr Pharaon did not draw the matter specifically to the attention of HCN because his own view expressed in November 1998 was the following : As there were no major change in status and I am holding partner of Al-Ameen Co & other partners were my Sons & Daughters -LRB- All Minors -RRB- .
That statement goes on to refer to the conversation with Mr Stowell of Hussmann at the FMI exhibition in 1993 , but again , as I have set out , that was in terms of merely the change of name from Establishment to Company .
-LRB- 6 -RRB- \ tIn August 1998 , prior to the arbitration hearing , HCN obtained legal advice in relation to the status of the Establishment as set out in the statement of Mr Yousef Al-Jadaan a lawyer practising in Riyadh .
His statement explained that the arbitration had been commenced by HCN , not only to recover the substantial sum owed by the Establishment , but also because it wanted to appoint another distributor in Saudi Arabia ; there was a real concern on their part that , without a declaration from the tribunal that the agreement had been terminated or was no longer in effect , attempts would be made by Mr Pharaon to prevent the appointment of a new distributor by way of proceedings in Saudi Arabia .
-LRB- 11 -RRB- \ tAfter that evidence was given and the further information provided by the Respondents , an application was made by HCN for leave to amend the definition of Al Ameen in their request for arbitration and statement of claim which I have set out in paragraph 8 above so that it was made clear that it referred to Mr Pharaon trading as the Establishment ; they also sought leave to amend the defence to the counterclaim to plead that notice of the assignment had not been given to HCN and that therefore the Company had not become a party to the agreement ; that the Company was therefore not entitled to claim the commission and the Establishment had disabled itself from performing the agreement in February 1994 and was therefore not entitled to commission after that date .
However , whether I approach this question as a review of the decision made by the tribunal -LRB- as was suggested by Toulson J in Ranko Group v. Antarctic Maritime -LRB- The Robin -RRB- 12 June 1998 , briefly reported at Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Maritime Newsletter 15 September 1998 -RRB- or as a fresh hearing of the issue on jurisdiction -LRB- as was submitted was the proper approach -RRB- , the decision of the tribunal was plainly wrong .
\ n \ tIt is clear as a matter of the law of Saudi Arabia that if the assignment was to be effective , HCN had to consent to it .
-LRB- see the judgment of Moore-Bick J in Rustall v Gill and Duffus -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 14 at page 20 -RRB- .
\ n The appointment by the tribunal of the expert \ tAlthough the contract between the Establishment and HCN was clearly governed by the law of Saudi Arabia , none of the pleadings in the case suggested that the law of Saudi Arabia was in any material respect different from the law of England and Wales .
He has had a career of immense distinction , first in Libya then in Egypt and Palestine and finally in London .
That part of the report showed that there is one significant difference between the law of England and Wales and that of Saudi Arabia in relation to construction of agreements ; under Saudi law evidence of the subsequent conduct of the parties is admissible to assist in construction .
\ tIt was suggested that , as s. 46 -LRB- 1 -RRB- -LRB- a -RRB- of the Arbitration Act 1996 requires the arbitral tribunal to decide the dispute in accordance with the law chosen by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute , a mandatory requirement was imposed on a tribunal sitting in London where the proper law was a law other than the law of England and Wales to obtain general evidence and guidance in relation to that foreign law .
If there is no suggestion by the parties that there is an issue under the applicable system of law which is different from the law of England and Wales , or the tribunal does not itself raise a specific issue , then the tribunal is free to decide the matter on the basis of the presumption that the applicable system of law is the same as the law of England and Wales .
To hold otherwise would mean that international arbitrations held in London would be encumbered with the considerable extra expense of obtaining general evidence of foreign law relevant to the matters in issue in every case where the proper law of the contract was not the law of England and Wales .
\ n \ tIn my view the correct course to have been followed by the tribunal was to have asked the parties whether there were any points where the law of Saudi Arabia differed from the law of England and Wales or to have itself raised with the parties specific points on which they might need assistance .
The total number of hours spent by the arbitrators were : the chairman 185 hours , Mr Murray 160 hours and Dr Anvari 150 hours .
\ n Would it have been reasonable to order repayment by Mr Murray and Dr Anvari .
\ tBoth Mr Murray and Dr Anvari were paid their fees on 27 September 1999 and their evidence was that they had expended them in the discharge of their personal and business expenditure .
In 1997 through their Belgian office they entered into negotiations with the Brokers , a company domiciled in Norway , for a contract of affreightment for shipments of iron ore from Brazil to China .
\ n \ tOn 7 October 1999 David Steel J gave permission to the Owners to serve the arbitration claim form on Bao Steel in China and on the Brokers in Norway .
It is also common ground that if the Owners want to bring a substantive claim for damages against the Brokers , in the event that it is found that they had no authority to make the contract of affreightment on behalf of Bao Steel , then that claim would have to be made in Norway ; furthermore it would be determined by principles that might be different from the law of England and Wales .
AG v. Societa Italiana Impianti -LRB- The Atlantic Emperor -RRB- -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 1 ECR 3855 , -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 342 the European Court of Justice set out its view on the purpose of the exception of arbitration from the scope of the Convention at page 3900 : \ n \ xc2 \ x9317 .
\ tThe international agreements , and in particular the above mentioned New York Convention on the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards -LRB- New York , 10 June 1958 , United Nations Treaty Series , Vol .
\ n \ tIn Lexmar Corporation and Steamship Mutual Underwriting Association v. Nordisk -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 289 , Colman J held that proceedings to enforce an undertaking given by a third party securing an order for security for costs made in the arbitration were not within the exception .
\ n \ tIt therefore follows from my conclusion on the scope of the arbitration exception in the Convention that the High Court of England and Wales has no jurisdiction over the Brokers to determine the issue raised .
In acceding to that submission , Clarke J -LRB- after referring to a passage in the judgment of Bingham LJ in the John C Helmsing -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 290 dealing with the relationship between RSC Ord 11 and RSC Ord 73 -RRB- said : \ n \ xc2 \ x93I accept -LSB- counsel for the second defendants \ xc2 \ x92 -RSB- submission that the rationale of O. 73 , r. 7 is that the parties to an arbitration agreement have consented to the determination of their disputes by arbitration in England .
\ xc2 \ x94 \ tIn Tate & Lyle Industries Ltd v Cia Usina Bulhoes and Cargill Inc -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 355 Hobhouse LJ considered in August 1996 -LRB- as a single Judge of the Court of Appeal -RRB- an appeal from a refusal by Clarke J to grant an injunction sought against the first defendants -LRB- who were parties to an arbitration agreement with the plaintiffs -RRB- and the second defendants -LRB- Cargill -RRB- who were not .
Mr Justice Clarke , therefore , accepted that there were arguable points capable and suitable for consideration by the Court of Appeal that arose out of his decision in Unicargo v. Flotec and his application of it to the present case .
The choice of London -LRB- or another seat within England and Wales -RRB- is the principal basis by which the court derives its jurisdiction under this paragraph of the table .
-LSB- 1999 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 772 and the authorities set out in the judgment of Langley J at page 779 .
It seems to me very clear words would have been needed to give the Courts of England and Wales authority to order , for example , an inspection of property controlled by a third person out of the jurisdiction merely because the parties to an arbitration had chosen England and Wales as the seat of their arbitration .
\ tThe next ground on which the Brokers relied was their contention that the terms of the Arbitration Act 1996 did not permit the Owners to seek the determination against Bao Steel by the court of the question of whether there was a binding agreement ; there was therefore no basis to seek a declaration against either Bao Steel or the Brokers , irrespective of the fact that Bao Steel and the Brokers were domiciled and resident outside England and Wales .
\ xc2 \ x94 \ tIt is clear from the DAC Report that this principle was included because of international criticism that the courts of England and Wales intervened more than it was thought they should in the arbitral process , and this was a discouragement to the selection of London as a forum for arbitration .
\ xc2 \ x94 \ tThe authorities relating to the jurisdiction of the court to grant declarations was further reviewed by the Court of Appeal in Meadows Indemnity Co Ltd v Insurance Company of Ireland -LSB- 1989 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 298 where the plaintiff reinsurers sought various declarations including a declaration as against the insured -LRB- the second defendants -RRB- in respect of the insurance contract between the insured and their insurers -LRB- the first defendants -RRB- .
I do not think that in those circumstances it would be proper to exercise the court \ xc2 \ x92s jurisdiction to compel the Brokers to become parties to proceedings brought against them by Owners in London , when they will be subject to the risk of further proceedings in Norway by the Owners .
b ` Mr Justice Toulson : Introduction The claimants allege that over a five year period from 1992 to 1996 their employee Mr Simon Templeman , the first defendant , took bribes amounting to over US $ 1.4 million from or with the connivance of the second to seventh defendants .
It is headquartered in Dublin with offices in London and elsewhere .
During 1989 and 1990 Fyffes secured several contracts for the supply of bananas which necessitated a year-round shipping service to carry the fruit from Central America to Europe .
From April 1990 until November 1991 Mr Templeman worked from Fyffes \ ' offices in London , reporting to Mr Russell Peters , who was a director of Fyffes Group Limited and head of its marine department in London , which handled all shipping matters affecting the group .
In November 1991 Mr Templeman was seconded to Fyffes Bananas International in Fort Lauderdale , Florida .
From November 1991 until he was transferred back to England in early 1997 he reported to Mr Dennis Martin .
Subsequently a commercial war developed as Fyffes sought to increase their market share in Central America .
Fyffes found banana growers willing to switch to them from Chiquita , but they needed to establish a regular service for shipment of the bananas .
Negotiations between Fyffes and Seatrade led to the preparation of a form of contract of affreightment -LRB- COA -RRB- , dated 8 February 1990 , between the seventh defendant and the second claimant , Caribbean Gold Limited -LRB- a Fyffes company based in Guernsey -RRB- .
At this time the `` banana wars '' -LRB- as they were described in press reports -RRB- reached the point that armed attacks were made in Honduras on Seatrade vessels carrying Fyffes bananas and cancellations occurred as a result of anticipated violence .
In June 1990 a peace agreement was reached between Chiquita and Fyffes which opened the way for Fyffes to acquire a significant portion of the market , subject to a four month cooling off period in which Chiquita was to take all the growers \ ' fruit from Honduras .
Mr Musterd \ 's evidence was that during their conversation on 2 October Mr Templeman explained that Fyffes required a 1.25 % commission to be routed through Cyprus as a contribution to what he called a slush fund to help finance their expansion activities in Central America .
That information did not cause Mr Musterd surprise or suspicion in the light of the history of Fyffes \ ' expansion into Central America and battle with their competitors .
He recognised that the payments were not intended to be shown in Fyffes \ ' published accounts , and he agreed that it was an improper arrangement inasmuch as it provided a way of transferring money for the purpose of paying bribes in Central America .
On 7 October 1991 Mr Templeman reported to Mr Martin and Mr David McCann on his freight negotiations with Seatrade , REL and Cool .
On 8 October 1991 there was a meeting between Mr Templeman and Mr Hayward -LRB- an in-house accountant -RRB- for Fyffes and Mr Van Overklift and Mr Musterd for Seatrade .
On 14 October 1991 Mr Templeman instructed Mr David Robinson , a shipping solicitor and partner at Berwin Leighton , to act for Fyffes in drafting a service agreement .
The meeting on 4 November 1991 The meeting on 4 November 1991 was attended by Mr Van Overklift , Mr Musterd , Mr David McCann , Mr Martin , Mr Peters , Mr Hayward and Mr Templeman .
Mr David McCann said in his witness statement : - On 4 November 1991 I attended a meeting in London .
In his oral evidence Mr McCann said that he believed that he discussed with Mr Templeman and Mr Martin before the meeting how they would play the question of commission , because it was his particular hobby horse .
In cross examination Mr Templeman agreed with Mr Jones QC that if the matter had been raised by Mr McCann his heart would have been in his mouth `` or probably out of it '' -LRB- day 3 , page 139 -RRB- .
Neither Mr Martin nor Mr Hayward remembered any mention of commission at the meeting .
Mr Peters said in his written statement : `` I was present at the meeting at York Gate on 4 November 1991 ... I remember that at one stage in the meeting Mr McCann asked Mr Van Overklift for confirmation that there were no commissions involved in the deal , although I do not recall what Mr Van Overklift said in response .
In translation it reads : Of course you realise that the Fyffes contract includes 1.25 % confi -LRB- sic -RRB- commission -LRB- via Cyprus - `` slush '' fund -RRB- .
In outline , Seatrade agreed to provide for 12 months a weekly transportation service from four load ports in Central America and the Caribbean to Zebrugge and Portsmouth , based on a 35 day round voyage .
Invoices from Daphne to Seatrade were in standard form , showing a PO box , telephone , fax and bank account numbers , all in Limassol .
Mr Templeman gave evidence about an occasion in the course of negotiations for the renewal of the service agreement when there was a meeting in Groningen attended by Mr Van Overklift , Mr Musterd , Mr Hartog , Mr Martin and himself .
The events of early 1996 In January 1996 Mr Templeman travelled from Florida to Europe to discuss future shipping arrangements in the aftermath of Fyffes \ ' takeover of Geest \ 's banana division .
While Mr Templeman was in England , his wife Suzanne rang to tell him that she wanted a divorce .
Daphne was to be replaced by a company called Paru Container Services Limited , which , like Daphne , had a PO box address and bank account in Limassol .
In his witness statement Mr Templeman described what happened next as follows : The next time I saw Mr Van Overklift and Mr Pepping together , which was in Antwerp a couple of days later , I told them that Suzanne wanted a divorce .
On 4 February 1996 Mr Templeman faxed to Mr Van Overklift the following message , marked confidential : Whilst I was recently in Antwerp and again when we met in Southampton you kindly offered to help me in my marital problems .
Fyffes \ ' discovery of the commissions On 15 November 1996 Mr Templeman was visited at his office in Fort Lauderdale by two agents of the United States Inland Revenue Service Criminal Investigation Division .
His attorney made it clear to him that it was inevitable that the IRS would contact Fyffes .
Mr Templeman had been discussing with Fyffes the possibility of returning to the United Kingdom and he now pressed for a transfer home as soon as possible , but without disclosing the reason for his urgency .
Mr Templeman was more successful in his efforts to persuade Fyffes to transfer him back to the United Kingdom , and he returned in February 1997 .
Fyffes learned of the IRS investigations in March 1997 , when the IRS contacted their Fort Lauderdale office and issued them with a summons to produce information .
The matter was reported to Fyffes \ ' headquarters by a fax from the general manager of the Fort Lauderdale office as follows : - The IRS are conducting a criminal investigation on Simon Templeman for the years 1992 to 1997 .
They say that Simon has received weekly payments from a Co called Daphne Business Corp in Cyprus to a level well in excess of his Fyffes salary .
Mr David McCann immediately summoned Mr Templeman to Dublin .
Mr Van Overklift had himself received a phone call from Sergeant Burde , the officer in charge of the IRS inquiry , and had put the matter in the hands of Seatrade \ 's general office manager , Mr Larsson , and their legal department .
Mr Templeman confirmed this and said that he was just returning from Dublin after seeing David McCann and telling him that Seatrade had been paying him a commission .
Mr Templeman replied that it was true and that he had been in Dublin that day and told Fyffes the story .
On 26 March 1997 the IRS wrote to Mr Larsson as follows : Mr SIMON TEMPLEMAN manager of Marine Operators for Fyffes Bananas International -LRB- FYFFES -RRB- , is the subject of an official investigation by this Department .
Therefore , in furtherance of this official investigation , it is requested that you provide detailed records of the following : \ tIdentify all Fyffes officials involved in negotiating shipping contract with Scaldis since January 1st 1992 ; \ r \ n \ tIdentify all Scaldis officials involved in negotiating shipping contracts with Fyffes since January 1st 1992 ; \ r \ n \ tNature of Scaldis \ ' business association with Simon Templeman ; beginning and ending dates of Scaldis \ ' business association with Simon Templeman ; \ r \ n \ tRecord of each rebate and or commission payment made by Scaldis as a result of doing business with Fyffes , and records of the corresponding transactions which generated these rebates or commissions , since January 1st 1992 ; \ r \ n \ tDetails of how , to whom and by what means the rebates and commissions generated by doing business with Fyffes were made ; and the identity of the Fyffes employee -LRB- s -RRB- who took part in providing these instructions ; \ r \ n \ tRecords of all banking and transmittal documents pertaining to the payment of these rebates/commissions including bank wires to Fyffes , Templeman and Daphne Business Corp. \ r \ n The IRS appear not to have known at that stage about the Paru commissions , but they asked for the dates of Seatrade \ 's association with Mr Templeman and for details of all commission payments made since 1 January 1992 .
On 18 April 1997 there was a meeting in Dublin between Mr Musterd , Mr Van Overklift , Mr David McCann and Carl McCann .
Mr David McCann said that Fyffes had become aware that Seatrade had paid large kickbacks to Mr Templeman and that the situation was extremely serious .
Mr Mustard responded that Mr Templeman had said that Fyffes would like a commission paid in Cyprus .
On 28 April 1997 Mr Larsson wrote to the IRS : To clarify the background the contract between Seatrade Group NV Willemstad , Curacao and Fyffes Group Limited , London , England was concluded 19 December 1991 .
At that time the organisation of Seatrade Groningen , Holland represented Seatrade Group NV and Fyffes was represented by their shipping manager Mr Simon Templeman .
During the negotiation of the contract it was made clear by Mr Simon Templeman that Fyffes demanded an address commission , which is a normal way of providing a rebate to cover the charter \ 's administrative shipping cost .
The business has been conducted during the years 1992-1995 under this agreement and during this period with Mr Simon Templeman as the sole commercial contact with Fyffes .
It was put to Mr Van Overklift that there was a deliberate decision to conceal the Paru commissions both from the IRS and from Fyffes at the meeting on 18 April 1997 , when -LRB- according to Mr Carl McCann \ 's note -RRB- he referred to the amount of the commission as about $ 1.2 million , because the transfer from Daphne to Paru and the circumstances in which it occurred were incriminating .
The defendants say that they believed at all times that the payments were not for him personally but were for the furtherance of Fyffes \ ' business in the Caribbean .
The allegation made by Fyffes is grave and requires correspondingly cogent proof : Hornal v Neuberger Products -LSB- 1957 -RSB- 1 QB 247 and Jyske Bank v Spjeldnaes , 29 July 1999 , Court of Appeal -LRB- unreported -RRB- .
In the course of the telephone conversation , Mr Templeman indicated to Mr Musterd that Fyffes would require a 1.25 % commission on the lump freight to be paid under the proposed service agreement ... Mr Templeman indicated to Mr Musterd that Fyffes required the 1.25 % commission to be paid to them `` through Cyprus '' to be used by Fyffes to finance their market expansion activities in Central America .
Paragraph 4.3 of the points of reply , presumably based on a statement provided by Mr Templeman , stated : It is denied that Mr Templeman indicated to Mr Musterd that Fyffes would require a payment of 1.25 % commission , or that Fyffes required the 1.25 % commission to be paid to them through Cyprus to be used by Fyffes to finance their market expansion activities in Central America , as alleged or at all .
On 22 August 1997 Mr Klaus Hinrichsen , REL \ 's broker , wrote to Mr David McCann after a meeting in Dublin , saying : Your allegation was that we actively made approaches to ST by offering him a private participation of 1.25 % , payable to an account in Cyprus , on all freight paid under a contract of affreightment that we negotiated between him as the charterers \ ' representative and Ira Heisler of Reefer Express Lines .
The point is a fair one ; but logic would also suggest , as Mr David McCann himself recognised , that he would have discussed the matter in advance with the Fyffes team including Mr Templeman .
Mr Jones further submitted that the documents relied upon by Fyffes as incriminating were all capable of innocent explanation , and he pointed to the fact that many of them had been disclosed by the defendants as an indication of lack of guilty knowledge on their part .
Given that Mr Templeman \ 's proposal to Mr Musterd had such unusual features , as Mr Musterd must have appreciated , I have to consider the plausibility of Mr Musterd \ 's evidence that he was taken in by the explanation which it is common ground that Mr Templeman put forward when introducing his request , the effect of which -LRB- whatever the precise words used -RRB- was that the commissions were to go to a slush fund for the promotion of Fyffes \ ' interests in Central America .
If , however , Mr Templeman had been deceiving Seatrade , he would hardly have told Mr Van Overklift in the same conversation about his matrimonial difficulties , about his being blackmailed by Suzanne and about his wish to change the commission payments from Daphne to Paru .
Seatrade \ 's internal documents show that they calculated the amount of the payments made to Daphne and to Paru , but their answers to the IRS \ 's questions were misleading because they chose to confine the information they gave to the Daphne payments about which the IRS already knew .
I conclude that Mr Van Overklift recognised that the Paru payments and the circumstances of the change from Daphne to Paru were incriminating and hoped that neither Fyffes nor the IRS would learn about them .
Rather , he tried to distance himself from the correspondence with the IRS by saying that it was handled by Seatrade \ 's claims department and he denied any intention to withhold information from Fyffes .
There was also evidence from documents disclosed by Seatrade that he had some involvement at the time of the IRS investigation and was aware then of the payment of commission both to Daphne and to Paru .
But I do remember overhearing a discussion between Erik and Marnix in which it was mentioned that Fyffes were preparing to fight their bitter experiences with internal influential figures in Central America .
There is also a right in equity to compensation for dishonestly assisting in Mr Templeman \ 's breach of his fiduciary duty to Fyffes -LRB- Royal Brunei Airlines v Tan -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 AC 378 -RRB- .
In his closing submissions Mr Howard advanced the further alternative that damages should be assessed not by determining as a matter of probability what a hypothetical honest and prudent negotiator would have done but by estimating the value of Fyffes \ ' lost chance of obtaining better terms through an honest negotiator .
1992 freight The expert witnesses , Mr Needham for Fyffes and Mr Thomassen for Seatrade , each had many years \ ' experience of the reefer market .
Mr Martin made the point in his witness statement : From the lessons learned in 1991 , and because Fyffes was not an established shipper , ensuring that vessels were 100 % loaded was more important from my perspective than an argument over 10 cents on the basic freight rate .
Mr Needham calculated the resulting loss to Fyffes at $ 830,022 , and those calculations were not challenged .
The IRS criminal investigation was under way and Mr Templeman was trying to arrange for his transfer back to London .
For the reasons given by Mr Needham and largely accepted by Mr Thomassen , I do not think that an honest and prudent negotiator for Fyffes would readily have agreed to the alteration to the bunker adjustment clause proposed by Seatrade ; and , if he had remained firm on the point I think it probable that Seatrade would have agreed to the standard clause originally proposed by them .
Fyffes have calculated the resulting loss by taking Antwerp as a nominal reference port .
Seatrade criticised that approach on the ground that Antwerp would not have been an appropriate port in any event , but I do not attach weight to that criticism for the reasons given by Mr Needham in response to it .
Firstly , he expressed the view that the use of Antwerp was not unreasonable as a major bunkering port within close proximity to a major discharge port , Zeebrugge .
Secondly , he supported the use of Antwerp as a good indicator for bunker price movements by comparing it with various other ports , including Rotterdam .
Loss of a chance Mr Howard submitted that by agreeing to Mr Templeman \ 's request for secret commission Seatrade deprived Fyffes of the opportunity of negotiating through an honest and prudent negotiator ; and that if , in relation to any particular aspect of the service agreement and its addenda about which they complained , Fyffes failed to establish that an honest and prudent negotiator would probably have negotiated a more favourable agreement , they are entitled to damages reflecting the value of their lost chance that he would have done so .
Mr Jones submitted that if Seatrade failed to establish as a matter of probability that any particular clause was objectionable by the standard to be expected of an honest and prudent negotiator , Fyffes would have failed to establish any loss under that head and that it would be wrong in those circumstances to award them damages under the head of loss of a chance .
As Denning J put it in Duke of Westminster v Swinton -LSB- 1948 -RSB- 1 KB 524 , 534 : The real question in each case is : What damage has the plaintiff really suffered from the breach .
The lost chance may be of securing a benefit -LRB- eg a prize in a beauty competition , as in Chaplin v Hicks -LSB- 1911 -RSB- 2 KB 786 -RRB- or of avoiding a liability -LRB- eg under the terms of a lease , as in Allied Maples Group Ltd v Simmons and Simmons -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 WLR 1602 -RRB- .
Thus in Chaplin v Hicks the wrong consisted of failing to give the plaintiff a fair opportunity of succeeding in the competition .
In the solicitors \ ' negligence cases -LRB- such as Hall v Meyrick -LSB- 1957 -RSB- 2 QB 455 , Cook v Swinfen -LSB- 1967 -RSB- 1 WLR 457 , Kitchen v Royal Air Force Association -LSB- 1958 -RSB- 1 WLR 563 and Allied Maples Group Ltd v Simmons and Simmons -RRB- the essence of the breach of duty was that it deprived the client of a chance of securing a benefit or avoiding a liability which it was within the object of the retainer to secure or avoid .
Richardson v Mellish -LRB- 1824 -RRB- 2 Bing 229 and Davies v Taylor -LSB- 1974 -RSB- AC 207 , often cited as loss of a chance cases , were concerned with questions of quantification rather than causation of loss .
That decision was disapproved by the Privy Council in Attorney General for Hong Kong v Reid -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 AC 324 .
In Consul Development Pty Ltd v DPC Estates Pty Ltd -LSB- 1975 -RSB- 132 CLR 373 , 397 , Gibbs J said : The strict rule of equity that forbids a person in a fiduciary position to profit from his position appears to be designed to deter persons holding such a position from being swayed by interest rather than by duty -LRB- see Bray v Ford -LSB- 1986 -RSB- AC 44 , 51 -RRB- ; it is `` A rule to protect directors , trustees , and others against the fallibility of human nature '' : Costa Rica Railway Co Ltd v Forwood -LSB- 1901 -RSB- 1 Ch 746 , 761 .
Lord Keith -LRB- at p 262 -RRB- , with whom Lord Griffiths and Lord Jauncey agreed , cited Reading v Attorney General -LSB- 1951 -RSB- AC 507 as an authority in support .
Similar problems arose in relation to the fiduciary himself under the rule in Lister v Stubbs that a proprietary remedy was available only where the principal sought to recover his own property and not where the fiduciary had merely made a profit for which he was accountable to his principal .
The practical objections were spelt out by Lord Millett in `` Bribes and Secret Commissions '' -LSB- 1993 -RSB- RLR 7 , an address delivered to the Society of Public Teachers of Law and cited with approval by LT in Attorney General for Hong Kong v Reid .
It is important to remember the warning of the High Court of Australia in Warman , at paragraph 33 of the judgment , that `` the liability of the fiduciary should not be transformed into a vehicle for the unjust enrichment of the plaintiff .
\ r Metalsrussia were responsible for the shipping arrangements and the coils were shipped on board the vessel MARKOS N at Ventspils in Latvia for carriage to Philadelphia , the bills of lading being issued on the 23 rd and 24 th of January 1997 on the Congenbill form .
The affidavit went on : - `` In January 1997 negotiations commenced between Western Bulk carriers and Metalsrussia for the charter of the MARKOS N to carry a cargo of steel from Ventspils Latvia to Camden and Houston .
It was against this background that on the 15 th January 1999 the shipowners applied for a stay of the New York proceedings on the grounds that the bills of lading incorporated a London arbitration clause .
On the 12 th August 1999 Judge Mukasey gave judgment and stayed the New York claim in favour of London arbitration .
The threshold requirement here has been considered by the Court of Appeal in Harbour and General , supra .
I appreciate that Mr. Goulding has said in a statement dated the 27th April 2000 that he made numerous requests for copies to Mr Buhl of Western Bulk Carriers by telephone but was advised there was no charterparty .
She was in the course of a voyage from Piraeus , via the Corinth canal then Zante , Zakinthos , to Puerto Cervo in Sardinia .
\ r \ n Mr David Johnston of Holmes Hardingham -LRB- solicitors for the Defendants -RRB- interviewed the crew in Sicily on 25 and 26 July 1995 .
Towards the end of the trial , in the course of cross examination of the Defendant \ 's expert , Mr Robinson , Mr Young QC for the Claimants appeared to suggest that flexible piping might fail ; -LSB- 3 -RSB- or a blank flange acting as the cover of a sea strainer might fail if it was not properly tightened down by a crew member or for some other reason .
\ r \ n The Insurers allege that the plan to scuttle the Vessel was first thought of by the Manager of the yacht , Mr Haissam Mahjoub , who was Sheikh Khalid \ 's right hand man in Athens where Sheikh Khalid was a frequent visitor .
The Insurers say that Sheikh Khalid agreed to this plan and that the Master was specifically recruited in Piraeus to carry out the plan to which the engineer was also a party .
-LSB- 11 -RSB- The Insurers allege that the plan was put to the Master and engineer and they agreed to carry it out during a weekend cruise from Athens on 8/9 July 1995 , when only Sheikh Khalid and his companion , Miss Anthi Priovolos , were aboard the yacht with the crew and Mr Mahjoub .
The Vessel then underwent repairs and a Classification Society Special Survey in Piraeus before undertaking her voyage to Sardinia .
The Insurers say that the final signal to the Master and the engineer to sink the yacht on her voyage to Puerto Cervo was given when she called at Zante , Zakinthos , before starting her passage across the Ionian Sea towards the Straits of Messina .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- The facts : -LRB- a -RRB- The Owners - Brownsville and Sheikh Khalid -LRB- b -RRB- An assessment of the witnesses of fact other than the alleged conspirators ; -LRB- c -RRB- the Vessel - her layout and equipment ; her previous history , including her condition and maintenance and the cost of her use ; the possibility of selling her ; her insurance ; -LRB- d -RRB- the Vessel \ 's crew - including the recruitment of Engineer Karagiannides , Captain Pastras , and the deckhand , Mr Hatjitsaikos ; -LRB- e -RRB- the events leading up to the Vessel \ 's last voyage ; -LRB- f -RRB- the Vessel \ 's last voyage up to her loss ; -LRB- g -RRB- the aftermath : the rescue ; the events in Sicily and communications with Sheikh Khalid , Mr Mahjoub and the Insurers ; -LRB- h -RRB- Miss Priovolos ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- The Cause of the Loss : -LRB- a -RRB- the parties \ ' technical cases ; -LRB- b -RRB- the facts and the technical cases ; -LRB- c -RRB- conclusions on the cause of the loss , including the issue of proximate cause ; -LRB- 4 -RRB- Was Sheikh Khalid privy to a plan to scuttle the Vessel .
C \ tThe Facts -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tBrownsville Holdings and Sheikh Khalid ; Haissam Mahjoub and other witnesses Brownsville Holdings This was a Jersey company , which was set up to own the Vessel .
In spring 1995 Sheikh Khalid left that company to run his own independent consulting business in Jeddah .
Sheikh Khalid spent a great deal of time in Athens .
-LSB- 50 -RSB- In 1995 Sheikh Khalid was married to a lady called Valerie .
Mr Karagiannides gave evidence that the bilge alarm system was tested by ABS at the Special Survey and also that he had tested it on the last voyage : either at Piraeus , or at Corinth , where she had picked up bunkers , or at Zante .
-LSB- 126 -RSB- \ t -LRB- 7 -RRB- \ tIn June 1994 it was decided that the yacht should leave Mallorca for Corfu .
One of the reasons for the early departure to Corfu was the increase in berthing costs at Mallorca during the summer months .
Sheikh Khalid made further economies by refusing to sanction expenditure on hull painting , -LSB- 137 -RSB- and by ordering the Vessel to leave Mallorca for Corfu at the end of June 1994 so as to avoid the increase in berthing charges at Mallorca in July 1994 .
\ t -LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tIn cross-examination Sheikh Khalid stated that in July 1997 he had given instructions to his secretary , Mr Zubair , to give all relevant documents to his Jeddah lawyers -LRB- not Linklaters -RRB- and he did not know what happened thereafter .
-LSB- 152 -RSB- It is also contrary to evidence that Sheikh Khalid gave in cross-examination , when he said that he kept documents relating to the Vessel in Jeddah .
\ r \ n The 1994/5 Renewal \ tOn 10 April 1994 Sheikh Khalid sent a fax to the Insurers asking for a renewal of the H&M cover for only three months because '' currently negotiations are going under way for the sale of yacht and it may be finalised after the month of April '' .
\ r \ n The Defendants also alleged -LSB- 168 -RSB- that Sheikh Khalid made an exaggerated claim in the name of Brownsville in 1987 .
At the same time the yacht was moved from Mallorca to Athens .
\ r \ n When Sheikh Khalid and Mr Mahjoub were asked in cross examination why Mr Grout was not re-employed in May 1995 , they both said that it was because they wanted a Greek Master now that the Vessel was permanently based in Athens .
Sheikh Khalid insisted -LSB- 172 -RSB- that Mr Rundle was dismissed because he was drinking too much alcohol .
I suspect that the truth is that Mr Rundle was bored in the marina in Athens and that , once his wife had left the yacht in September 1994 , he may have drunk more than was sensible .
-LSB- 181 -RSB- -LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tThe events leading up to the last voyage : the early July cruise and the dry docking in Piraeus The Weekend Cruise of 8-9 July 1995 prior to the dry docking \ tIt is agreed that Sheikh Khalid spent this weekend cruising on the yacht with Miss Priovolos and Mr Mahjoub .
After the cruise Sheikh Khalid stayed in Athens for a time then went to London .
Thus he left Greece as the yacht left on her last voyage from Piraeus .
\ r \ n The arrangements for the proposed stay in Puerto Cervo , Sardinia \ tOn 14 July 1995 Captain Pastras sent a fax , via Mr Mahjoub \ 's office in Athens , to the managing director of the marina at Puerto Cervo .
As she was intending to get to the Ionian Sea via the Corinth canal and as the canal dues are higher at night , Mr Mahjoub decided that the Vessel should leave Piraeus , get through the canal and bunker in Corinth the following day .
\ t -LRB- 8 -RRB- \ tThe Defendants also submit that the crew \ 's evidence of a list to port is impossible to reconcile with the expert evidence and calculations of Mr Robinson , which they say must be accepted as they were not seriously challenged by Mr Stanley .
-LRB- 6 -RRB- \ tThe aftermath : the rescue ; the events in Sicily and communications with Sheikh Khalid , Mr Mahjoub and the Insurers The Rescue \ tThe Master had taken a position of the Vessel by a radar range and a visual bearing off Cape Spartivento at about 1700 hours .
\ t -LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tMr Mahjoub telephoned Sheikh Khalid in London shortly thereafter .
This was that there are continuing proceedings in Greece between Miss Priovolos and Sheikh Khalid about the ownership of a flat in Athens .
-LSB- 284 -RSB- In the course of his cross examination of Mr Robinson , the Defendants \ ' expert witness , several ways in which water could get into the engine room were canvassed by Mr Young QC .
-LSB- 289 -RSB- A refurbished case only emerged in the cross examination of Mr Robinson , after Mr Stanley had given his evidence .
But in any event Mr Robinson demonstrated from his answers to Mr Young in cross examination that this new case would not fit the evidence of the crew .
In the absence of any contrary evidence from Mr Stanley the Claimants have to accept Mr Robinson \ 's answers and I do so as well .
-LSB- 304 -RSB- Conclusion on the Technical cases \ tMr Stanley did not seriously challenge these calculations of Mr Robinson .
-LSB- 305 -RSB- Mr Robinson \ 's calculations were not challenged when he was cross examined by Mr Young .
The Vessel was within 25 miles of land , but not in a particularly busy seaway such as the Straits of Messina ; the weather was calm and warm .
Taking all these factors together I have concluded that they amount to sufficient '' circumstances of cumulative suspicion , anyone of which , taken alone , would not justify the Court in fixing so grave and criminal a stigma upon Plaintiffs as that of fraudulently -LSB- sinking -RSB- a vessel '' -LSB- 326 -RSB- to reach the conclusion that I am satisfied that Sheikh Khalid was privy to the plan to sink the yacht .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 28 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See the Points of Agreement and Disagreement of the Experts dated 15 May 2000 : D1/page 213 : paras 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 29 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Closing Submissions para 25 on page 8 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 30 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0The Defendants accept that if there are two operative causes , one covered by the policy risks and one not , then provided that the second cause is not an excluded peril , the Assured can recover : The Miss Jay Jay -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 32 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 31 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- 1982 -RSB- QB 946 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 32 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Compare the SG policy and the comments of Mustill J -LRB- as he then was -RRB- in Shell International Petroleum Co Ltd v Gibbs -LSB- 1982 -RSB- QB 946 at 959B-D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 33 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0This was inevitable given that the Claimants had not identified in the pleadings , the witness statements or Mr Stanley \ 's reports any possible events leading to the failure of a flange which would amount to perils of the seas ; latent defect or negligence in repair or maintenance \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 34 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0They rely on a statement of principle by Lord Brandon in Rhesa Shipping Co SA v Edmunds : The `` Opi M '' -LSB- 1985 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 1 at 4 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 35 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 624 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 36 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0My emphasis \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 37 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See The `` Marel '' at page 629 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 38 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 The `` Marel '' at page 629 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 39 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- 1918 -RSB- AC 350 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 40 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 See report at page 369 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 41 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 See report at page 370 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 42 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- 1983 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 235 .
On this point the decision of Bingham J was not challenged on appeal \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 43 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 See report at page 249 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 44 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Claimants \ ' Opening Submissions para 24 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 45 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See : Kirkaldy v Walker -LSB- 1999 -RSB- LR and IR 410 at 422 per Longmore J \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 46 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0In paragraph 14 : A1/95 -6 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 47 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0On this point I was referred to Elfie A Issaias v Marine Insurance Co Ltd : The `` Elias Issias '' -LRB- 192 -RRB- 15 Lloyd \ 's List Reports 186 ; The `` Olympia '' -LRB- 1924 -RRB- 19 Lloyd \ 's List Reports 255 at 257 per Lord Birkenhead LC ; Compania Naviera Martiartu v Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation : The `` Arnus '' -LRB- 1924 -RRB- 19 Lloyd \ 's List Reports 95 at 96 per Scrutton LJ ; Compania Naviera Santi SA v Indemnity Marine Assurance Co Ltd : The `` Tropaioforos '' -LSB- 1960 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 469 at 473 per Pearson J ; Piermay Shipping Co SA v Chester : The `` Michael '' -LSB- 1979 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 1 -LRB- CA -RRB- ; N Michalos & Sons v Prudential Assurance Co Ltd : The `` Zinovia '' -LSB- 1984 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 264 at 270-272 per Bingham J ; The `` Captain Panagos DP '' -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 470 ; The `` Ikarian Reefer '' -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Rep 68 at 71-73 per Cresswell J ; -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 455 at 457 -LRB- CA -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 48 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 The `` Zinovia '' -LRB- supra -RRB- at 273 per Bingham J \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 49 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 1/page 92 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 50 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 1/page 149 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 51 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 1/page 109 lines 5-10 ; Mr Mahjoub accepted this effectively : Day 5/page 3 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 52 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 '' Black water '' was the phrase used to describe effluent from the lavatories on board the Vessel .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 119 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0D/page 48 para 4.4 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 120 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 10/page 108-9 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 121 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 1/pages 95-99 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 122 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See E/50 ; F3/703 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 123 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0B/133 -4 ; E6/1782 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 124 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E1/176 : Memo of Fairhurst to Sheikh Khalid of 18.3.92 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 125 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E1/203 : Memo of 30.5.92 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 126 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E3/815 : Memo from Ryves to Sheikh Khalid of 30 March 1994 : '' the hull is in desperate need to be done '' .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 136 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 2/pages 69-71 ; Sheikh Khalid referred to having a skipper on board as '' an unnecessary expense '' \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 137 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See E/859 : Memo from Ryves to Sheikh Khalid of 11 May 1994 and the manuscript response faxed at E/861 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 138 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E/928 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 139 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 2/page 100 line 16 to page 101 line 2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 140 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See E/793 -LRB- with Med-Sale -RRB- ; E/848 -LRB- with Oyster Marine -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 141 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 5/page 7 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 142 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Sheikh Khalid to Ryves in Dec 1993 : Ryves statement para 65 at C1/page 142 ; Sheikh Khalid to Karagiannides on the weekend cruise in July 1995 : Day 9/page 69 ; Majhoub to Karagiannides in January 1995 : Day 9/page 56 .
The same point is made in Mr McKie \ 's affidavit of 17 July 1997 : B2/page 297 para 13 , but he , of course , was reliant on what he was told by his clients \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 153 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 1/page 97 lines 9-10 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 154 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Mr Dean \ 's valuation , on behalf of both parties , being that she would sell for $ 600,000 to $ 700,000 gross or $ 540,000 to $ 630,000 net : D1/page 185 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 155 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E/823 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 156 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0F5/1002 : fax of 12 July 1994 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 157 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0F5/1049 : fax from Adamjee in Saudi Arabia to Karachi office : 16 October 1994 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 158 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E/1668 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 159 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 2/page 55 lines 22-23 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 160 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 2/page 103 lines 6-9 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 161 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Statement para 26 : C1/page 7 ; Day 2/pages 53-54 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 162 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See E/485 : fax of 13 April 1993 -LRB- changes to deckhand and engineer -RRB- ; E/494 : fax of 20 April 1993 -LRB- change of engineer and stewardess -RRB- ; E/1445 : fax of 28 January 1995 -LRB- change of engineer from Mr Rundle to Mr Karagiannides -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 163 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0E/1365 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 164 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 2/page 80 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 165 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Day 2/page 80-81 .
It was confirmed in cross examination : Day 9/pages 69-70 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 183 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Notification of this was sent by ABS to the Claimant \ 's representative in Antwerp in January 1995 and passed onto Sheikh Khalid on 26 January 1995 : E/1444 and 1443 .
Sheikh Khalid said he could not remember : Day 4/pages 77-8 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 326 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0The words of Lord Birkenhead LC in Angelatos v Northern Assurance Co -LRB- `` The Olympia '' -RRB- -LRB- 1924 -RRB- 19 Lloyd \ 's List Reports 255 at 257 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- .
\ r \ n On 16th July 1999 Mr Doughty entered into an agreement with the Company and the Club under which he would subscribe \ xc2 \ xa36M for 29.75 million new ordinary shares in the Club representing 40.5 % of its share capital , with an option to subscribe a further \ xc2 \ xa36M for a further 23.8 million new ordinary shares -LRB- following which he would hold 55 % of the enlarged share capital so that he would control the Club and the Company would become a minority shareholder -RRB- .
The Claimants also say , and the Defendants deny , that the prices at which the Company \ 's shares were allotted to Mr Doughty and at which he had an option to acquire further shares in the Company , represented an undervalue .
It is the Defendant \ 's submission that , on the material before the Court , it is apparent that , at all material times , the Directors of the Company realised that to go ahead with the transaction with Mr Doughty would , in all probability , result in litigation of the type which has in fact emerged , brought on behalf of substantial minority shareholders who opposed the Company entering into the transaction and preferred the proposal that Mr Scardino acquire a substantial shareholding .
The same is true where a company is made defendant to a representative shareholders action against directors under the rule in Foss v Harbottle .
The cases of Woodhouse and Dennis were cited by Harman J in re Hydrosan Limited -LSB- 1991 -RSB- B.C.C .
In the present case Miss Roberts for the Defendants , while accepting , as she was bound to , that the rule as to disclosure found in the Woodhouse case was applicable to small private companies with limited share holdings , argued that it should not be applied to companies such as the first defendants , a PLC with substantial numbers of shares on issue , quoted on a stockmarket .
\ r \ n Miss Roberts was unable , when pressed by me , to produce any satisfactory criterion by which to judge whether the company concerned was one to which the Woodhouse rule as to disclosure would be applied and one that to which it would not .
The port of Southampton is operated by Associated British Ports -LRB- `` ABP '' -RRB- , a statutory corporation formerly known as the British Transport Docks Board established under section 1 of the Transport Act 1962 .
The contractor employed by ABP to carry out the work was the claimant , Jan de Nul -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd -LRB- `` Jan de Nul '' -RRB- , the English subsidiary of Jan de Nul N.V. , a Belgian company specialising in dredging operations around the world .
\ r \ n The port of Southampton lies on the confluence of the rivers Test and Itchen , Southampton Water being the name given to that part of the estuary which extends from the lower tidal reaches of the Test and the Itchen to the Solent .
SPECIAL CONDITIONS Insured activities : DREDGING OPERATIONS IN THE SOUTHAMPTON PORT Insureds : Within the insured business , the Principal of the works , ASSOCIATED BRITISH PORTS - PORT of SOUTHAMPTON , is insured as well .
Leaving aside unidentified members of the public who complained about a reduction in the depth of water available in the Marchwood Basin but who were unable to show that they had suffered any particular damage , the following groups of claimants are identified in schedule 2 to the points of claim : \ r \ n -LRB- i -RRB- the Ministry of Defence on behalf of the Crown in respect of interference with the use of Marchwood military port ; -LRB- ii -RRB- Southern Water Services Ltd in respect of interference with the use of the berths at Slowhill Copse and Weston Jetty ; -LRB- iii -RRB- Marchwood Wharfage Ltd in respect of interference with the Marchwood Wharf ; -LRB- iv -RRB- Husband \ 's Ltd , yacht builders and repairers , in respect of interference with its moorings , jetty and slipway ; -LRB- v -RRB- Marchwood Yacht Club and various individuals in respect of the interference with the use of moorings in the Marchwood Basin and ABP as owner of the river bed in that area ; -LRB- vi -RRB- ABP in respect of interference with berths 30-36 and the Itchen approaches ; -LRB- vii -RRB- ABP , Marchwood Wharfage , Husband \ 's Shipyard and others in relation to the obstruction of the Marchwood Channel and Basin ; -LRB- viii -RRB- the Waterside Fisherman \ 's Association in respect of damage to clam and oyster beds in Dibden Bay ; -LRB- ix -RRB- Hampshire Wildlife Trust in respect of deposits of silt on parts of the nature reserve at Eling and Redbridge Marshes .
\ r \ n Originally Jan de Nul had intended to employ its own TSHD , Mercator , then under construction , to remove the bulk of the pre-cut material , but the vessel \ 's delivery was delayed and Jan de Nul therefore chartered a vessel of similar capacity , the Amsterdam .
Mr. De Keyser accepted that if full pre-cutting and trailing trials had been carried out in the laminated sands as well as the greensand , Jan de Nul would probably have become aware of the difficulties subsequently encountered by the Amsterdam before work started .
Mr. Oxford , Jan de Nul \ 's managing director , said that it was not until March that Jan de Nul had conclusive evidence that the work as a whole was the cause of the siltation complained of , but in the face of the expert evidence it is impossible to accept that Jan de Nul responded to the evidence that was already available by early January 1997 in a way which could be expected of a reasonably prudent and careful contractor .
The Privy Council in the Candlewood case declined to follow Caltex Oil -LRB- Australia -RRB- Pty v Dredge `` Willemstad '' -LRB- 1976 -RRB- 136 C.L.R .
The decision in the Candlewood case was followed in The Aliakmon in which Lord Brandon at page 809 referred to \ r \ n '' .
Mr. Hamblen relied principally on two authorities , Tate & Lyle Industries Ltd v Greater London Council -LSB- 1983 -RSB- 2 AC 509 and Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd -LSB- 1997 -RSB- AC 655 , which , he submitted , ruled out the possibility of a claim in nuisance by any of the third parties other than the Crown in respect of Marchwood military port and Hampshire Wildlife Trust in respect of the Eling and Redbridge Marshes .
The House of Lords held that as a riparian owner Tate & Lyle was entitled to enjoy access to the water in contact with its frontage and to have the water flow to it in its natural state .
However , the House held that Tate & Lyle did not , by virtue of being a riparian owner , have any right to a minimum depth of water .
\ r \ n In Hunter v Canary Wharf residents in the vicinity of Canary Wharf claimed damages for negligence and nuisance in respect of interference with the reception of television broadcasts caused by the construction of the tower block and in respect of the deposit of dust caused by the construction of a link road .
\ r \ n Just over three years before the speeches were delivered in Hunter v Canary Wharf the nature of the tort of nuisance and its relationship to the tort of negligence and to the rule in Rylands v Fletcher had been considered by the House of Lords in Cambridge Water Co. v Eastern Counties Leather Plc -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 2 AC 264 .
The rule in Rylands v Fletcher is one of strict liability , but Lord Goff , with whom the other members of the Appellate Committee agreed , did not consider that it gave rise to a liability any more strict than that created by the law of nuisance .
Nonetheless , that degree of obstruction was sufficient to constitute a public nuisance , and the damage suffered by Tate & Lyle was sufficient to entitle it to recover damages .
In support of this submission he referred me to R v Betts and others -LRB- 1850 -RRB- 16 Q.B .
In support of this argument he drew my attention to Martin v London County Council -LRB- 1898 -RRB- 14 T.L.R .
In Hunter v Canary Wharf Lord Hoffmann , commenting on Bone v Seal -LSB- 1975 -RSB- 1 W.L.R .
In these circumstances the Ministry of Defence on behalf of the Crown had a good claim against Jan de Nul in negligence and nuisance .
In substance I think that the position with regard to Weston jetty is indistinguishable from that which existed in the Tate & Lyle case .
\ r \ n The most recent discussion of this question , as well as the most authoritative , is now to be found in Hunter v Canary Wharf , the speeches in which were delivered some 14 months after the judgment in the Crown River Cruises case .
\ r \ n Questions of a very similar kind arose for consideration in Australia in Ball v Consolidated Rutile Ltd -LSB- 1991 -RSB- Qd .
Ambrose J. , having considered a number of Canadian authorities and the decision of the Privy Council in Attorney-General for British Columbia v Attorney-General for Canada -LSB- 1914 -RSB- AC 153 declined to hold in the absence of binding authority that an interference with the right to fish in tidal waters constituted a public nuisance , although a contrary conclusion had been reached in Canada : see Hickey v Electric Reduction Co. of Canada Ltd -LRB- 1970 -RRB- 21 D.L.R .
\ r \ n The nature of the public right to fish in tidal waters is a right to take fish , including shellfish , by whatever means are considered effective , subject to any statutory restrictions : see Attorney-General for British Columbia v Attorney-General for Canada at page 169 approving in general terms the passage in Hale \ 's De Jure Maris cited by Lord Blackburn in Neill v. Duke of Devonshire -LRB- 1882 -RRB- 8 App .
While I would agree with Ambrose J. \ 's analysis of the decision in Attorney-General for British Columbia v Attorney-General for Canada , I would respectfully differ from him on the question of whether an interference with the right to fish is capable of constituting a public nuisance .
\ r \ n The decision in The Ella was approved and applied in Dee Conservancy Board v McConnell -LSB- 1928 -RSB- 2 K.B .
Two expert witnesses , Professor Dr. Hugo Vandenberghe of the University of Leuven and Mr. G \ xc3 \ xa9rald Straatman , a practising lawyer and partner in the firm of Roosendaal Keyzer , Antwerp , gave evidence of the position under Belgian Law .
The policy in the present case is a commercial contract designed to protect the insured against third party liability and was entered into in contemplation of work being carried out outside Belgium , in this case in England .
The dredging contract identified the location of the works as follows : \ r \ n `` The works shall be executed at the Port of Southampton in the Main Shipping Channel between the Esso terminal at Fawley and the Bury Swinging Ground at Prince Charles Container Port .
Indeed , in the absence of any definition of the area for which Jan de Nul was responsible , it is difficult to see where the line could sensibly be drawn between those parts of Southampton Water and the Solent which fell within the scope of its responsibility and those , if any , which did not .
That includes the dredging of the Marchwood Channel and Basin as well as the waters in the area of Weston jetty and Marchwood wharf .
At that meeting Royale Belge was represented by Mr. De Keyser and Mr. Sainderichin and Jan de Nul was represented by Mr. Albert and Mr. Everaert of the parent company and by the project manager , Mr. Luypaert .
The proces-verbaal contains or evidences an agreement between Mr. De Keyser and Mr. Albert as to the sum which Jan de Nul was willing to accept in compromise its claim under the policy and which Mr. De Keyser for his part would recommend to Royale Belge .
Having said that , however , I am satisfied having heard the explanations provided by Mr. Oxford and Mr. Albert that all the costs which Jan de Nul seeks to recover in respect of its own operations were in fact incurred in carrying out remedial work and I am not persuaded that any of them were incurred unnecessarily .
\ r \ n Summary In view of the complexity of this case I think it may be helpful at this point to summarise my conclusions as follows : \ r \ n -LRB- a -RRB- in the case of Marchwood military port , Slowhill Copse , Husband \ 's Shipyard , and Berths 30-36 Jan de Nul incurred liability to third parties in negligence and nuisance .
Jan de Nul is entitled to recover all the costs incurred in removing silt from these areas ; -LRB- b -RRB- In the case of Weston jetty , Marchwood Wharf , Marchwood Yacht Club , the private moorings , Marchwood Channel and Marchwood Basin Jan de Nul incurred liability to the third parties only in public nuisance .
Jan de Nul is therefore entitled to recover the costs incurred in removing silt from these areas ; -LRB- c -RRB- In the case of Berths 30-36 and the Itchen approaches Jan de Nul incurred liability in negligence to ABP as conservator of the port ; it is therefore entitled to recover the cost of removing silt from this area ; -LRB- d -RRB- Although Jan de Nul incurred a liability to commercial fishermen arising from the siltation of the shellfish beds , the loss represented by the compensation paid to the Waterside Fisherman \ 's Association is not recoverable having been caused by non-accidental pollution within the meaning of the policy ; -LRB- e -RRB- In the case of Eling and Redbridge marshes Jan de Nul incurred liability to Hampshire Wildlife Trust in negligence and nuisance .
\ r \ n Turning now to the construction point itself , Mr. Hunt says that the construction of Article 37.1 -LRB- e -RRB- adopted by the Tribunal was both artificial and too restrictive .
Its business is conducted from premises in Dubai and in the United Arab Emirates -LRB- `` the UAE '' -RRB- .
The Bank operated a payment card scheme pursuant to a written agreement between Visa International Service Association -LRB- `` VISA '' -RRB- and the Bank which was concluded in England on 13 December 1990 .
Paymentech is based in Texas , USA .
In the case of Paymentech , which is located in Texas , the relevant VISA authorisation centre is in California , USA .
Once the Acquirer has obtained authority from the VISA authorisation centre -LRB- in this case in California -RRB- , the authorisation centre has to seek approval from the corresponding VISA authorisation centre in the area in which the Card Issuer -LRB- in this case the Bank -RRB- is based .
For the Bank the relevant region is Central Europe , Africa and the Middle East .
The VISA centre for this region is in Basingstoke , Hampshire , UK .
\ r Between November 1997 and January 1998 Sissoko \ 's VISA card was used for 18 purchases of jewellery at Mayor \ 's Fine Jewellers in Miami , Florida , USA .
The Bank says that ultimately this meant that the Bank was defrauded because Dubai \ 's account with VISA was debited with the amount of the transactions .
\ r On 15 November 1999 Miss Misfeldt wrote to the Bank -LRB- from an office in San Francisco , California , USA -RRB- , informing it of the International Board \ 's decision .
This letter was received by Jonathan Rosenn of Fine & Associates , the Florida lawyers acting for the Bank , on 29 November 1999 .
Therefore the Bank had 28 days from 29 November 1999 in which to make any applications to the Court under the 1996 Act , assuming that the Court has jurisdiction to entertain those applications .
On 2 December 1999 Mr A R Ellison , a banker and consultant to the Bank , had requested Mr Rosenn -LRB- by telephone -RRB- to inquire of VISA where the International Board of VISA sat when it made its decision .
\ r Mr Ellison was in the USA on the Bank \ 's business between 14 and 24 \ xc2 \ xa0December 1999 .
On 17 December he instructed Mr Rosenn to send the relevant papers to Clyde & Co in Dubai .
Mr Ellison \ 's travel and business commitments prevented him from giving any comprehensive instructions to Clyde until his return to Dubai on 29 December 1999 .
Mr Ellison \ 's witness statement in support of the application was signed in Dubai on 22 January and the Application was issued on 24 January 2000 .
That is : for the purposes of sections 2 and 3 of the 1996 Act , is the `` seat of the arbitration '' in England and Wales ?
But section 2 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Act states that the provisions of Part One of the Act apply to an arbitration where `` the seat of arbitration is in England and Wales or Northern Ireland '' .
Both parties agree that the Court has no jurisdiction to hear or determine the Bank \ 's applications under sections 67 to 69 unless the Court is satisfied that the seat of the arbitrations is in England and Wales .
\ r That conclusion is reached this way : \ r -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tunder paragraph 8.1 of the Arbitration Practice Direction , if the arbitration claim form seeks to challenge or appeal an award -LRB- as the Bank wishes to do in this case -RRB- , the Court may only give permission to serve an arbitration claim form out of the jurisdiction if the award was made in England and Wales .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tBy section 53 of the Act : `` Unless otherwise agreed by the parties , where the seat of the arbitration is in England and Wales \ xc2 \ x85any award in the proceedings shall be treated as made there , regardless of where it was signed , despatched or delivered to any of the parties '' .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tTherefore the English court can only consider the Bank \ 's application if the Bank establishes that the seat of the arbitrations was in England , so that -LRB- under section 53 -RRB- the awards will be treated as having been made in England .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tThe conduct of this reference , which concerned an `` inter-regional '' dispute between a Card Issuer in one of VISA \ 's global regions and an Acquirer in another , makes it clear that the `` seat '' of the arbitration is California , not England .
In particular in relation to the appeal procedure : -LRB- a -RRB- \ tthe notification of appeal was sent by the Bank to VISA in California ; -LRB- b -RRB- \ tthe lengthy submissions of the Bank were sent by its lawyers , Fine & Associates , to VISA in California ; -LRB- c -RRB- \ tPaymentech \ 's responses were sent to VISA in California ; -LRB- d -RRB- \ tthe procedure on appeal is dealt with by VISA \ 's Director of Arbitration and Compliance , Miss Misfeldt , who is based in California ; -LRB- e -RRB- \ tthe appeal has to be dealt with by the International Board as part of the agenda for one of its four \ xc2 \ x96 monthly meetings .
In fact it was London ; -LRB- f -RRB- \ tthe decision of the International Board on the appeal was notified to the parties from VISA in California .
The second is that the Bank dealt operationally with VISA in England -LRB- through the centre at Basingstoke -RRB- .
The Bank \ 's Submissions \ tMr Veeder QC for the Bank submitted : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThe task of the Court under section 3 is to make an objective determination of the `` seat '' .
The distinction is well established in English law : Naviera Amazonica Peruana SA v Compania Internacional de Seguros del Peru -LRB- `` the Peru case '' -RRB- -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 116 .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tThe key factor here that makes England the seat of the appeal arbitration is that the appeal was held , heard and determined by the appellate tribunal -LRB- the International Board of VISA -RRB- in London .
In particular : -LRB- a -RRB- \ tthe contract between the Bank and VISA was concluded by correspondence between Dubai and London ; -LRB- b -RRB- \ tthe Bank \ 's contact points for VISA was London or Basingstoke , Hampshire ; -LRB- c -RRB- \ tVISA \ 's business registration in Dubai is consistent with the view that the Bank was dealing with a UK entity .
All ICC arbitrations are organised through Paris ; it does not make France the seat of all ICC arbitrations in the absence of any other choice of seat .
Therefore , in general , only those arbitrations that have their `` seat '' in England and Wales should be subject to the exercise of the Court \ 's powers in Part One of the Act .
The Part One regime applies `` whether or not the law applicable to the parties \ ' agreement is the law of England and Wales or , as the case may be , Northern Ireland '' .
It is clear that `` seat '' is intended to refer to some state or territory ; hence the reference to `` the seat of the arbitration -LSB- being -RSB- in England and Wales '' in section 2 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Act .
\ r I draw attention to these factors only to emphasise the point that the issue of whether an English Court can exercise these various powers depends -LRB- with exceptions -RRB- _ on the answer to the threshold question of whether , in accordance with sections 2 and 3 , the `` seat '' of `` the arbitration '' is England and Wales ?
The key circumstance that the Bank relies on is that the actual appeal hearing by the International Board took place at the Board meeting in London on 8 \ xc2 \ xa0November 1999 .
Secondly , there is the fact that the point of contact generally between the Bank and VISA was the VISA centre at Basingstoke .
Thirdly , there is the point that , at the start of the payment procedure , the Bank as Issuer would have received a request for authorisation from Basingstoke and -LRB- if it had been given -RRB- it would have gone to Basingstoke .
\ r If I consider those matters then it is clear that the `` seat '' of the appeal arbitration process is not in England , but is probably located in California .
The Bank is based in Dubai .
Although the Bank had to grant authorisation for those transactions -LRB- as Issuer -RRB- through Basingstoke , Paymentech had to deal with its authorisation -LRB- as Acquirer -RRB- through California .
In my view this can not alter my conclusion that the `` seat '' of the appeal arbitration is not in England and is probably in California .
The reasons for this conclusion are : \ r -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tthe only additional factor pointing to England as the `` seat '' is that the International Board meeting at which the appeal of the Bank was heard took place in London .
It was not contemplated by anyone , in the Bank , VISA or Paymentech , that the appeal would necessarily be heard in London .
Question One : Conclusion Therefore , on either approach , I have concluded that `` the seat '' of the appeal arbitration in this case was not in England and Wales .
Instructions were given to pass the papers to Clyde & Co in Dubai on 17 December .
\ r Although Mr Newick asserted that the Bank would have `` an uphill task '' making good its applications challenging the Awards , he did not push that point hard .
\ r Conclusions The `` seat '' of the two appeal arbitrations is not in England and Wales for the purposes of sections 2 and 3 of the Act .
\ r If , contrary to this conclusion , I had found that the `` seat '' of the two appeal arbitrations was in England and Wales , I would have permitted an extension of time to the Bank to allow it to make the Arbitration Applications set out in the Application form dated 24 January 2000 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 8 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See para 4 of Mr Ellison \ xc2 \ x92s second witness statement : B 1/Tab 8 page 74 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 9 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See , eg : The Peru case -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 116 ; Union of India v McDonnel Douglas Corporation -LSB- 1993 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 48 ; Sumitomo Heavy Industries v Oil & Natural Gas Commission -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 45 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 13 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0The analysis is made by Mustill J -LRB- as he then was -RRB- in the Black Clawson case -LSB- 1981 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 446 at 455 , following the speech of Lord Diplock in the House of Lords \ xc2 \ x92 decision in Bremer Vulkan Schiffbau und Maschinenfabrik v South India Shipping Corporation Ltd -LSB- 1981 -RSB- AC 909 at 981 \ xc2 \ x962 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 21 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See eg : the Peru case -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 116 at 120 \ xc2 \ x96 1 ; Hiscox v Outhwaite -LSB- 1992 -RSB- AC562 at 594A-C .
\ r \ n \ tThe vessel was chartered by a voyage charter on the Synacomex 90 form and dated 2 March 2000 to Richmond Commodities Limited , -LRB- a British Virgin Islands company - `` Richmond '' -RRB- , for the carriage of a cargo of 13,000 tonnes of bagged rice from South China to the Mediterranean or Black Sea .
It seems likely that Richmond was the `` in-house '' chartering company for the Rustal group of companies , which are managed or represented by Rustal SA , a Swiss company based in Geneva .
Rustal BVI was named as the shipper of the cargo of bagged rice in proceedings that were begun by cargo interests in Varna , Bulgaria .
It stated that the discharge port for that portion of the cargo was Mersin , Turkey .
They indicated that the discharge port would be Varna , Bulgaria .
\ r \ n \ tSubsequently the Mersin bill of lading was replaced by three further bills of lading , which were issued in London dated 16 June 2000 and numbered BCP 3 , 4 and 5 .
\ r \ n The accident on the voyage from China \ tOn about 21 April 2000 there was an explosion on board the Vessel whilst she was crossing the Indian Ocean , making for her first discharge port of Mersin .
Then the Vessel was about to arrive at Mersin , Turkey .
In that he stated that the Shipowners had appointed Mr Mark Hamsher as arbitrator in respect of : \ r \ n '' all disputes arising out of the charter party dated 2 March 2000 and each bill of lading contract in connection with the voyage from China to Turkey and other ports with a cargo of 13,000 tonnes of bagged rice .
Mr Kenyon of Shaw & Croft , the London solicitors acting for the Defendants , has stated , on instructions from Mr Duron , that the Varna proceedings were mistakenly started by Rustal BVI , but should have been started by the First Defendant .
The fax also stated : \ r \ n '' May we ... remind you that the validity of the London arbitration clause incorporated in to the bills of lading ... has already been recognised by the Bulgarian court of Varna '' .
\ r \ n \ tHFW Paris then reluctantly agreed to provide a Club Letter of Undertaking that referred to '' la jurisdiction competente '' , whilst maintaining their position that the London arbitration clause should be applied .
-LRB- 6 -RRB- \ tAlternatively the Court has jurisdiction because the claims fall within paragraph 8.1 of the Arbitration Practice Direction , because -LRB- i -RRB- it is arguable that there is an arbitration agreement ; and -LRB- ii -RRB- the `` seat '' of the arbitration must be in England and Wales .
the contract to arbitrate disputes which is incorporated into the Bills of Lading ; and -LRB- iii -RRB- London , England is the '' place of performance of the obligation in question '' .
This is because : -LRB- i -RRB- each of the First to Fifth Defendants is domiciled in a Convention state ; -LRB- ii -RRB- those claims do not come with the `` arbitration exception '' in Article 1 -LRB- 4 -RRB- of the Brussels Convention ; -LRB- iii -RRB- therefore the Conventions must apply and , under Article 2 , the Defendants must be sued in their country of domicile , that is Eire , France and Italy ; -LRB- iv -RRB- CPR Part 6.20 -LRB- c -RRB- has no application to this case .
Further , the declaratory relief and anti-suit injunctions sought against the Defendants domiciled in Eire , France and Ireland are not related to the territorial jurisdiction of England and Wales .
\ tMr McParland submitted that this issue had to be decided and it could not be evaded by Mr Baker \ 's argument that even if the Convention -LSB- 21 -RSB- applied then the Court had jurisdiction by virtue of Article 5 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the Convention .
On the same day Marc Rich appointed an arbitrator in London .
The first was a general one on the scope of Article 1 -LRB- 4 -RRB- ; and second was on whether , if the Convention did apply , Marc Rich could rely on either Article 5 -LRB- 1 -RRB- or 17 of the Convention to found jurisdiction in England .
The Court concluded that : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThe international conventions on arbitration , particularly the New York Convention of 1958 , lay down rules on arbitration that must be respected by the courts of Contracting States .
\ r \ n \ tWhen the case was remitted to the English Courts Marc Rich applied for an injunction to restrain SII from continuing its proceedings in Italy .
This gave rise to litigation in England and France between shipowners and cargo interests .
Then Toepfer applied by Originating Summons to the English court for : -LRB- i -RRB- a declaration that Molino were obliged to refer the disputes to arbitration ; and -LRB- ii -RRB- an injunction to restrain Molino from continuing the Ravenna proceedings .
Molino applied to set aside or stay the English proceedings under Articles 21 and 22 of the Brussels Convention , on the ground that the Ravenna court was the court `` first seised '' of the proceedings .
\ r \ n Lexmar Corporation and The Steamship Mutual Underwriting Association -LRB- Bermuda -RRB- Ltd v Nordisk Skibsrederforensig and Northern Tankers -LRB- Cyprus -RRB- Ltd -LRB- `` The Lexmar case '' -RRB- -LSB- 63 -RSB- An arbitration dispute between Lexmar Corporation -LRB- the owners of the '' Vida I '' -RRB- and charterers , Norrthon Shipping Corporation of Liberia was compromised .
The terms also contained a Scott v Avery -LSB- 68 -RSB- clause .
\ tSubsequently Toepfer issued proceedings in the English court for declarations that -LRB- i -RRB- the two disputes were within the arbitration agreement ; -LRB- ii -RRB- Cargill were obliged to arbitrate the disputes ; and -LRB- iii -RRB- Cargill were in breach of the arbitration agreement in bringing proceedings in France .
As I have already noted in paragraph 56 above , Mr McParland for the First to Fifth Defendants did not make any submissions to counter those of Mr Baker that -LRB- i -RRB- there is an arguable case that the London arbitration agreement bound the First to Fifth defendants ; -LRB- ii -RRB- there is a serious issue to be tried on whether the Court should grant the declarations and the injunctive relief that the Claimants seek ; and -LRB- iii -RRB- the English forum is the appropriate forum to determine those issues .
In particular Leggatt LJ stated : -LSB- 80 -RSB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tthe conventional view that such injunctions acted on the party concerned , rather than as an order to the foreign court , might lack reality when the defendant had no presence in England and the order of the English court had to be enforced through the foreign court ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tin future cases if the foreign court regarded the injunctions as an infringement on its sovereignty that might be very significant ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tin relation to European Union states the best way of dealing with this problem might be the introduction of a Directive defining the extent of the recognition which the orders of the courts of Member States were entitled to receive from the courts of other Member States .
That is not surprising given the view of London arbitration expressed by Mr Duron , who is Mr Kenyon \ 's direct client .
\ tIn this case I would expect the French Court to take the view expressed by Millett LJ in the Angelic Grace case , -LSB- 95 -RSB- that is : \ r \ n '' The Courts in countries -LSB- like Italy -RSB- , which is a party to the Brussels and Lugano Conventions as well as the New York Convention , are accustomed to the concept that they may be under a duty to decline jurisdiction in a particular case because of the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction or arbitration clause .
\ tTherefore , although I must be cautious , in view of the statements made by the Court of Appeal in both the PASF case and the Toepfer v Cargill case , I have come to the conclusion that there is not a sufficiently '' strong reason '' why an injunction should not be granted against the First to Fifth Defendants .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- \ tThere are no '' strong reasons '' why an injunction should not be granted to restrain the First to fifth Defendants from proceeding in France or elsewhere other than in London arbitration .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 10 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tFirst witness statement dated 1 September 2000 at para 55 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 11 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tIn the second witness statement of Mr Pierce of HFW , dated 25 September 2000 , at para 19 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 12 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tThey were , of course , all represented in the Marseille proceedings by SCP of Marseille \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 13 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tSee Mr Kenyon \ xc2 \ x92s first witness statement para 3 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 17 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t Para 8.1 of the Arbitration Practice Direction permits service of arbitration proceedings out of the jurisdiction where the \ xc2 \ x94 seat \ xc2 \ x94 of the relevant arbitration is in England and Wales .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 20 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tSee the comment of Mr Duron in the fax to Mr Pierce of HFW on 24 May 2000 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 21 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tAlthough the wording of the Brussels and Lugano Conventions is identical , so the same point about the scope of Article 1 -LRB- 4 -RRB- arises on each , I think strictly only the Brussels Convention is relevant as the 1st to 5th defendants are domiciled in Eire , France and Italy .
One form provided for arbitration in Paris ; the other for arbitration in London .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 56 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1998 -RSB- ECR 7091 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 57 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See paragraph 32 of the judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 58 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See paragraph 31 of the judgment , which refers back to para 18 of the Marc Rich judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 59 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 15 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 60 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 510 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 61 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t At pages 512-513 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 62 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t Page 513 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 63 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 289 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 64 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tThey claimed to be subrogated to the rights of Lexmar to recover the costs \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 65 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See page 292 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 66 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See pages 292-293 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 67 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 98 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 68 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LRB- 1856 -RRB- 5 HLC 811 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 69 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tThat is the underlying dispute for alleged breach of contract in delivering sub-standard goods \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 70 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See page 103 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 71 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 510 at 512-513 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 72 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1992 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 624 at 628 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 73 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tThe phrase used by Rix J in The \ xc2 \ x93Xing Su Hai \ xc2 \ x94 case at page 21 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 74 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t The Van Uden case -LSB- 1998 -RSB- ECR 7091 at para 31 , referring back to the Marc Rich case at para 18 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 75 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1997 -RSB- ILPr 73 .
This report contains the judgment of Waller J and also the Court of Appeal \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 76 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See in particular paragraphs 100 to 114 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 77 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See paragraph 115 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 78 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See paragraph 84 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 79 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See paragraph 83 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 80 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See paragraph 48 of the CA judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 81 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 379 , particularly at 386 per Phillips LJ \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 82 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tThe English Court would only have jurisdiction , of course , if the English proceedings were not subject to the Brussels Convention -LRB- by virtue of Article 1 -LRB- 4 -RRB- -RRB- and/or Article 21 of the Convention was inapplicable .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 87 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See page 386 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 88 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t See Donohue v Armco -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 579 at 589 per Stuart-Smith LJ with whom Brooke and Sedley LJ agreed on this point : see pages 596 and 601 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 89 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tHence Stuart-Smith LJ \ xc2 \ x92s reference to The Angelic Grace case at page 589 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 90 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tPierce -LRB- 1 -RRB- at para 12 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 91 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tFax of 22 May 2000 from Mr Duron to Mr Searle of the Club \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 92 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tFax of 24 May 2000 from Mr Duron to Mr Pierce of HFW \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 93 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tFax of 5 June 2000 from Mr Duron to Mr Searle of the club \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 94 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tSee page 2 of the translation of the application : B/page 43 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 95 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ t At page 96 of the report \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 96 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ x02 \ tAt paragraph 94 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- .
The claimant therefore brought this action against Avon for the remaining balance available under Miss Nicholson \ 's policy .
Mr. Christie , for the insurers , adopted Mr. Stanbury \ 's argument .
The charter of the vessel `` Posidon '' was to carry a cargo of crude oil from one safe port , Guangdong Province in China to one safe port Lawi Lawi in Indonesia .
b ' Mr Justice Langley : THE CLAIMS In these proceedings , the Claimant to which I will refer as Dubal , makes claims against the 1st and 2nd Defendants , whom it alleges were its auditors in the years 1983 to 1991 , and its former solicitors , the 3rd Defendants , whom it alleges were given a special brief in July 1985 .
It is important to note that the limitation period in Dubai Law for certain claims , and Dubal says for these claims , is 15 years .
The auditor defendants served Defences in November 1998 and issued Third Party proceedings against the Chairman of Dubal .
The Application was supported by a Witness Statement from Mr Cranston of Dubal \ 's then solicitors .
THE SUBMISSIONS Mr Jarvis for Dubal submitted , first , that the claim had not , despite the parties \ ' assumption to the contrary , become stayed by operation of CPR 51 PD 19 -LRB- 1 -RRB- .
Mr Milligan , for the auditors , and Mr Lomas , for the solicitors , both submitted that on a proper construction of paragraph 19 -LRB- 1 -RRB- those events did not constitute the proceedings coming before a judge on paper .
If I was against him on this submission , Mr Jarvis submitted that the stay should be lifted substantially because the consequence of not lifting it -LRB- which it was agreed was that the claim would be struck out -RRB- was out of all proportion to any default committed by Dubal or its then solicitors which consisted only of failures to issue a summons for directions and to convene a Case Management Conference but at a time when , even if at a somewhat leisurely pace , the claim was being progressed by exchange of information and could not have been thought to have been other than one which Dubal intended to pursue .
Mr Milligan submitted that it was to be inferred from the delay in making the claim , the dilatory way in which it had then been pursued , and , as he submitted , the lack of any explanation for those matters , together with the lack of merit or obvious weaknesses of the claim , that Dubal had no faith in nor real intention of pursuing the claim to trial and had deliberately failed to comply with the Rules and practice direction .
Both Mr Milligan and Mr Lomas referred to the size of the claim , the exposure of individual partners because of the level of insurance cover , and what they submitted were obvious and overwhelming weaknesses in the merits of the claim .
Conclusion In summary I accept Mr Jarvis \ ' submissions that Dubal has not been guilty of any conduct which even approaches an abuse of process , and that such delay as has occurred has not damaged the prospect of a fair trial of the issues .
It is right to record , as Mr Jarvis submitted , that if Dubal is correct that the 15 year limitation period provided for by Dubai law applies to the claims , then it does so because the Defendants chose to do business in a country in which that was the law or to contract to provide professional services by a contract governed by that law .
This is a matter which , in my submission , the Court of Appeal , could fairly investigate and could perhaps help to clarify the law because if Mr. Percy is right , it effectively means that one can recover such damages in virtually every case .
That does not seem to have been what the Court of Appeal were saying in Wadworth - v - Lyle .
The Defendants were employing the vessel in their liner service for general and container cargoes between West Africa and South America .
Having proceeded via Abidjan , the vessel had arrived in Rio on the 14th February .
\ r \ n \ tThe managers had been in touch with the Piraeus fire brigade and with a fire consultant in England .
On the 21st February , they instructed Mr. Richard Sutcliffe of Messrs. Burgoyne & Partners to attend on the casualty and both he and Mr. Vitzileos , Primera \ 's Technical Manager left for Rio .
This reflected the unchallenged evidence contained in the report of Mr. Sutcliffe which excluded all possible causes other than the careless discard of smoking materials by the stevedores in Rio .
On this topic , I had the benefit of oral evidence from Mr. Vitzileos , the Technical Manager , who attended on the vessel at Rio and Mr. Dimakis , the Operations Manager , who co-ordinated matters in Greece , as well as the Master and Mr. Sutcliffe .
This was subsequently discharged at Mangalore on 24th and 25th April 2000 , at Karwar on 25th and 26th April 2000 , and at Chennai on 2nd and 3rd May 2000 .
The first stamp is Mr. Vaidya \ 's name , with his number V-II , that number being the number relating to his role number on the signatory cards kept by the Bank ; secondly , a round stamp , giving the Bank \ 's name and , in the middle , the words `` Mandvi Branch '' ; and , third , a stamp which reads \ t `` Yours Faith Fully \ t For And On Behalf of \ t State Bank of Saurashtra '' .
\ tOn 17th August 2000 the Owners obtained permission to serve proceedings out of the jurisdiction on the Bank in India .
\ tOn 13th September 2000 the Bank issued proceedings in the High Court in Bombay , for a declaration that the letters of indemnity were not binding .
\ tIt was agreed that I should first consider whether the courts of England and Wales had jurisdiction .
\ tThe first and most important fact is that there is now expert evidence of a very clear kind from Dr. Audrey Giles and Mr. Radley .
On the basis of the information supplied to her , Dr. Giles was confident that the stamps on the letters of indemnity were not from the stamps used by the Bank .
\ tThe first point made by Mr. Geering Q.C. , for the Bank , was that the Owners should not be entitled to run this case at all .
Under the provisions of the former Order 11 of the Rules of the Supreme court , the Court of Appeal said in Metall und Rohstoff A.G. v. Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Inc. and Another -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 Q.B. 391 at 436 : \ t `` Mr. Mark Waller , on behalf of M. & R. has , by way of amplification , explained to us the alternative ways in which they would seek to put their case , particularly in so far as it arises under the broad heads of \ ` Abuse of process of the court \ ' and \ ` Accounting as constructive trustees .
Vaidya was the manager of the Mandvi branch at Mumbai at the relevant time that the letters of indemnity , if issued by the Bank , would have been issued .
It appears that Lanyard had accounts at another branch of the Bank -LRB- the Vashi branch -RRB- and then opened an account at the Mandvi branch .
\ tHaving set out that background , it is possible for me to turn to the seven matters on which Mr. Berry relied for his submission that there was a good arguable case on the basis that the Bank was bound because Mr. Vaidya \ 's signature had been put on either with Mr. Vaidya \ 's authority or with the authority of someone else at the Bank .
In October 2000 Mr. Simpson , an investigator instructed by lawyers , acting for other owners who had received similar letters of indemnity , visited India and saw a number of people .
First of all , that the Bank had conducted a full and thorough investigation of the whole matter and Mr. Vaidya would be facing disciplinary measures ; that Mr. Vaidya had got far too close to Lanyard and allowed them too much ; he permitted them to open a deposit account at the Mandvi branch , which had been against Bank policy , because the main Lanyard account was at the Vashi branch , and that Mr. Vaidya had been very stupid .
Dash told him that the Mandvi branch had no authority to sign letters of indemnity on behalf of any customer and that Mr. Vaidya should not have signed , even to verify signatures .
It seems to me that if Mr. Berry is to run a case , as he does , of innocence on the part of a Bank , this must have something to do with lax practice in the bank and the closeness of the relationship between Mr. Vaidya and Lanyard is entirely irrelevant .
However , Mr. Berry relied on Mr. Simpson \ 's further evidence , that Mr. Mullick sent the letters of indemnity to the branch by messenger and thus he did not in fact see Mr. Vaidya sign .
Desai \ 's signature , but the Bank has not had to concentrate on this .
\ tThe sixth matter on which Mr. Berry relied is Mr. Radley \ 's evidence .
Very properly , Mr. Radley said he can not say who forged the signature of Mr. Vaidya , nor could he comment on which was correct of the possibilities that must have been put to him as raised by Mr. Berry .
It is clear that when Dr. Giles and Mr. Radley looked at the stamps , they looked on them using their great skill and experience as forensic document examiners and using scientific equipment .
Mr. Berry has had to argue , it seems to me , that the conduct of the Bank in doing this , although irregular , was innocent .
First , I am concerned that there may be some duplication between the work done by the solicitors in London and the people in India , because this case would have meant that there would have been a large number of lawyers employed .
Geering and Mr. Berry have canvassed these various matters before me .
The fire and sinking took place at the vessel \ xc2 \ x92s berth at Sotogrande , Spain .
Amongst other broadcasting and publishing activities , Media Most owns NTV , Russia \ xc2 \ x92s largest privately owned television network .
At the material time , Mr Paul Miller was the active underwrite of Yachtsure ; Mrs Ann Oakley was his assistant .
These properties are managed by Mont , the service company run by Mr Jacobs and his wife .
In addition , solicitors acting for underwriters were afforded permission to interview Mr Crossley , his wife , Mrs Crossley -LRB- who acted as a member of the crew -RRB- , Mr Jacobs and Mr Harranz .
\ n \ tThe point was bluntly and , in my judgment , well made by the claimant that it was for the underwriters to demonstrate that there were facts or circumstances known to the assured -LRB- other than mere speculations , vague rumours or unreasoned fears : see Carter v. Boehm -LRB- 1766 -RRB- 3 Burr .
The relevant press cutting contained the following section \ n \ xc2 \ x93Authorities used to blame journalists for the war in Chechnya , today they blame them for the miners strikes said media magnate Vladimir Goussinsky owner of MTV recounting how the authorities threatened to kill him when MTV pioneered fair coverage of the 1994-96 war in Chechnya .
Mr Goussinsky described to the court how pressure was exerted upon him to sell his shares in Media Most to a minority shareholder , Gazprom , and leave Russia .
\ n \ tHe was released following representations from all quarters both in Russia and outside , including a public intervention on his behalf by President Clinton .
Since the completion of the hearing there have been further press reports relating to the arrest of Mr Goussinsky on criminal charges instituted in Moscow which has led to his imprisonment in Spain .
In the Russian federation in the 1990s with all the negative things that can be said about Russian politics and Russian businesslife etc it is not the totalitarian Soviet Union where the KGB could have done anything they wanted to anybody .
Contract killings are a staple of Russian business life and victims have ranged from the US hotelier Paul Tatum gunned down in November 1996 to numerous Chairs of Russian banks \ xc2 \ x94 .
Secondly , it was also common ground that whatever the level of risk in Russia , it would be far less in Spain .
\ n Security in Spain \ tAs already recorded Mr Goussinsky first came to Sotogrande in 1994 and neither he nor his family had any form of personal security in Sotogrande -LRB- other than that furnished automatically by the mere fact of being within the confines of the development -RRB- until 1998 .
While I do not believe that the children are actually under any great threat of kidnap when in Spain , it gives me comfort to know that when I am not there that they are safe and I think it also gives my wife a degree of comfort she spending the greater part of the year in Sotogrande without me .
This arrangement was similar to that established in some 5 or 6 other houses in Sotogrande including one owned by the president of the Santander Bank .
\ xc2 \ x94 \ tIt was the decision of Mr Goussinsky himself to obtain his own personal security protection in addition to that already available at Sotogrande and that decision was provoked , not by any concern with regard to political or criminal enemies from Russia , but by virtue of his conversation with the Chief of Telefonica who persuaded him to adopt the same level of protection as that which was commonplace for wealthy Spanish businessmen .
Dr Galeotti \ xc2 \ x92s view that there was some degree of risk associated with the operations of organised crime outside Russia was based primarily upon a summary of attacks and killings of prominent Russians both inside and outside Russia produced by a team headed by Professor Phil Williams from Pittsburg University .
\ tIn the result given that the risk in Russia was , as I have already recorded , of a low order , the risk in Spain must be regarded as trivial .
It was his unchallenged view that Sotogrande was one of the most secure ports on the Costa del Sol or indeed in Spain generally .
Since the underwriters disclaim any reliance upon the failure to disclose his status as a Russian business magnate , there are no facts or circumstances emerging from Mr Goussinsky \ xc2 \ x92s residence in Spain and his use of yachts in and out of the port of Sotogrande in respect of which disclosure could be made .
THE SUBMISSIONS TO THE COURT Miss Healy submitted that the decisions of the Court of Appeal in The Mexico 1 and of Mr Justice Thomas in The Agamemnon -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 LL Rep 675 were clear authority in support of the proposition that where a charterparty stipulates that a particular notice of readiness is to be given in order to commence laytime there is no room for a construction which allows a notice given in the wrong manner or from the wrong place subsequently to become effective or a construction which in effect dispenses with the requirement for a notice once the vessel has commenced discharging .
Miss Healy acknowledged of course that in both The Mexico 1 and The Agamemnon the charterers conceded that laytime should be treated as starting once discharge actually commenced even in the absence of a valid notice of readiness but she submitted the juridical basis for the concession was plainly questioned and it was not consistent with the judgment simply to conclude that the concession as such represented the law : something more was required be it estoppel , variation or an implied contract .
Although Mr Gross referred me to it , I do not think that some at least of the reasoning of Donaldson J in The Helle Skou -LSB- 1976 -RSB- 2LL Rep 205 , in particular at 214 , can stand with The Mexico 1 .
In the Court of Appeal -LSB- 1978 -RSB- 2 LL Rep 154 the decision of Donaldson J was upheld but I think the question of `` acceptance '' turned on the meaning of particular documents -LRB- page 159 -RRB- and Sir David Cairns -LRB- at page 160 -RRB- expressly declined to `` consider further '' The Helle Skou .
The authority to which Mustill LJ expressly referred in the first passage I have quoted from his judgement in The Mexico 1 was the decision of Diplock J in Pteroti v National Coal Board , The Khios Breeze -LSB- 1958 -RSB- 1 QB 469 .
That argument derives from the decision of the Court of Appeal in Barrett Bros -LRB- Taxis -RRB- Ltd v Davies -LSB- 1966 -RSB- 1 WLR 1334 and in particular the judgment of Lord Denning MR with which Danckwerts LJ agreed .
I do not find it easy to draw a distinction of substance between the principle as stated by Lord Denning and the judgment of Mustill LJ in The Mexico 1 .
If , as Mr Gross submitted , the commencement and continuation of discharge is to have the effect of validation of an invalid notice or is in some way to amount to a notional notice given on the first available opportunity which would comply with Clause 30 , that in my judgment would be inconsistent with the judgment of Mustill LJ in The Mexico 1 rejecting the concept of an inchoate notice and would also be to re-write the parties \ ' contract in effect to delete the clear requirement for a particular notice .
\ r After the list of names there appear the following addresses : \ r \ t `` Defendants 1 st to 39 th Equitas Management Services Limited , 33 St Mary Axe London EC3 \ tDefendants 40 th to 87 th The Corporation of Lloyd \ 's , No 1 Lime Street London EC3 \ tDefendants 88 th to 110 th The Institute of London Underwriters , 49 Leadenhall Street London EC3A 2BE \ tDefendants 150 th to 151 st Victoria House , Queen \ 's Road , Norwich NR1 3QQ '' \ tIt seems clear that a mistake has been made in setting out these addresses , resulting in no address being given for defendants 111-149 , Lloyd \ 's being given as the address for company defendants and the Institute of London Underwriters being given for some of the Syndicates .
I have referred to the offices of `` Equitas '' : the forms were left at the offices at 33 St Mary Axe , London EC3 , where the offices of Equitas Management Services Ltd were to be found , and which is the address given on the Claim Form for `` defendants 1 st to 39 th '' .
On the same day that the forms were delivered a letter was sent on behalf of the Equitas companies to Thomas Cooper stating that service of the form did not constitute effective service upon the relevant syndicates .
When they had first been instructed in this matter in March 1999 , they sought to obtain the placing files from the brokers Sedgwick , Marine and Cargo Ltd , in order to investigate the background to the claim .
They received the following reply dated 12 November 1999 : `` In reply to your fax dated 12 November 1999 we would advise that in respect of the 1991 year Equitas are representing the R M Outhwaite 317 syndicate and in respect of the 1993 year Mr John Charman of J Charman 488 syndicate '' .
It appears that some of the Claim Forms were sent to Equitas , and that afternoon Equitas telephoned Thomas Cooper to advise that they did not accept that valid service had been effected .
\ r The attempt to serve the Claim Forms at the Equitas offices led to Equitas instructing solicitors , Freshfields , -LRB- now Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer -RRB- .
On 17 March 2000 they wrote to Thomas Cooper stating that the 1991 syndicates had not been properly served at Equitas \ ' offices , and that the Claim Forms issued on 16 November 1999 had expired .
In their reply dated 6 April 2000 Thomas Cooper , while maintaining that the syndicates had been properly served , stated that they understood from `` your clients '' that Mr Outhwaite was resident in Jersey and indicated that if Freshfields persisted in their stance they would apply to the court to serve Mr Outhwaite out of the jurisdiction .
\ r On 28 April 2000 Thomas , Cooper and Stibbard made an application to the court for permission to serve Mr Outhwaite in Guernsey .
However we have been in touch via Guernsey lawyers with the Court in Guernsey and the judge there has already given permission to the Court Sergeant to serve Mr Outhwaite in accordance with Guernsey law .
In the slip to which the 1991 Syndicates subscribed there is no leading underwriter clause comparable to that considered in The Irish Rowan , and therefore , Mr Berry submits , the underwriters do not have `` the same interest '' .
Mr Berry adds that , whereas the wording considered by the Court of Appeal in The Irish Rowan under the rules then in force referred to the persons having `` the same interests in any proceedings '' , the reasoning of the decision applied to the wording of the CPR part 19.6 , `` the same interests in a claim '' ; indeed he submits that the present wording supports his contention more strongly than the old wording .
First , the argument which Mr Berry seeks to advance is , in essence , that rejected by Mr Justice Waller in Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association v Taylor , -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyds LR 484 , a decision which Mr Berry properly drew to my attention .
More specifically he submits that the reasoning whereby Waller J held that the judgment of Sir John Megaw in The Irish Rowan did not compel him to the conclusion that representative proceedings were not available in the absence of a leading underwriter clause should be rejected .
-LRB- Equally in The Irish Rowan , as the Court of Appeal recognised , one insurer might theoretically have wished to run a non-disclosure or misrepresentation argument -RRB- .
Mr Berry observes the contrast between wording used in Appendix A to the Claim Form in relation to Mr Outhwaite \ 's syndicate -LRB- `` R M Outhwaite 317 syndicate '' -RRB- and that of Mr Charman , the active underwriter of the leading syndicate on the renewal policy -LRB- `` Mr John Charman of J Charman 488 syndicate at Lloyds '' -RRB- .
Accordingly Mr Berry is correct in his submission that the address 33 St Mary Axe , London EC3 on the Claim Form stated in relation to the `` defendants 1-39 '' is to be taken to be the address upon which the Claimants proposed to serve Mr Outhwaite , the representative for these `` defendants '' when they issued the form .
Nevertheless Thomas Cooper did nothing to clarify the situation , nor did they communicate with Equitas to confirm the position .
\ r Having relied upon this information before issuing the Claim Form , Thomas Cooper left it until a day or two before the end of the four months period before seeking to serve the Claim Form upon Equitas .
\ r In his submissions Mr Berry refers to the authorities about extension to the validity of the writ under the old Rules of the Supreme Court : specifically he refers to Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Barbrak Ltd -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 1AC 597 and Heaven v Road and Rail Wagons -LSB- 1965 -RSB- 2 QB 355 .
\ n \ tOn 11 July 1997 the Judgment Creditor obtained judgment against the three Judgment Debtors in proceedings in the Commercial Court of Brest , France , for US $ 101,248.84 and FF5 ,000 .
The Garnishee also carries on banking business in London from its offices at Lower Thames Street and Gerrard Street .
Having thus established a place of business in England , it has pursuant to its obligation under section 691 of the Companies Act 1985 notified the Registrar of Companies of the name and address of a person in Great Britain who is authorised to accept service of proceedings on its behalf .
If the order to show cause were to be made absolute , the Garnishee would have to pay any balance on the account to the Judgment Creditor here in England , up to the limit of the judgment debt , but would be at risk of still having to pay that same balance to the Judgment Debtors in Hong Kong .
Thus the Judgment Creditor can bring proceedings in Hong Kong to enforce the judgment it has obtained against the Judgment Debtor either -LRB- 1 -RRB- by applying to the court of First Instance in Hong Kong for registration and enforcement of the judgment of the Brest Commercial Court pursuant to the Reciprocal Enforcement Ordinance ; or -LRB- 2 -RRB- by commencing proceedings in Hong Kong based on the judgment which it has obtained in England under the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 .
There is undoubtedly a passage to this effect in the judgment of the Court of Appeal at pages 1043 H-1044C although it should be noted that that was in fact a case in which the court went on to hold that the debt sought to be attached should be treated as properly recoverable in England and capable of being discharged under English law .
He submitted that it was not incumbent upon the Judgment Creditor to show that the Garnishee would not , if the order were made absolute , be exposed to a real risk of being required by the Hong Kong court to pay the debt again and in that regard he relied on a passage in the judgment of Hobhouse J at an early stage of the Deutsche Schachtbau - v - Shell litigation reported in -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 2 Lloyds Reports 294 at 301 , cited by Lord Goff of Chieveley in the same case when it reached the House of Lords at -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 AC 295 , at page 347 G-see also the passage in Lord Goff \ xc2 \ x92s speech at pages 357 H to 358 A in which he expressed his agreement with the approach of Hobhouse J on the relevant question .
\ n Mr Page submitted that pursuant to elementary restitutionary principles a person who pays another person \ xc2 \ x92s debt under legal compulsion may claim restitution from the debtor-see Goff and Jones , the Law of Restitution , 5th edition 1998 at pages 437-8 .
For good measure the garnishee could , submitted Mr Page , if Hong Kong law were the same as English law , exercise a common law right of lien and set-off in relation to the debtors \ xc2 \ x92 liabilities-see Misa - v - Currie -LSB- 1876 -RSB- 1 App Cas 554 at 569 .
See also Chatterton - v - Watney -LSB- 1881 -RSB- 17 Ch D 259 at 260 per Sir George Jessel MR , re General Horticultural Company , ex parte Whitehouse -LSB- 1886 -RSB- 32 Ch D 512 at page 515 per Chitty J and Galbraith - v - Grimshaw -LSB- 1910 -RSB- 1 KB 339 at pages 343-4 per Farwell LJ .
\ xc2 \ x94 -LSB- See per Lord Goff in Deutsche Schachtbau - v - Shell -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 AC 295 at 354 .
As a matter of discretion , however , the court will not garnish a debt where , although the garnishee is within the jurisdiction , the debt is recoverable outside the jurisdiction , if to do so may expose the garnishee to the risk of having to pay the debt , or part of it , twice over -LRB- Martin - v - Nadel -LSB- 1906 -RSB- 2 KB 26 ; S.C.F .
Lord Goff in the Deutsche Schachtbau case asked , but left unanswered , the question whether , in a case where the situs of the attached debt is not England , \ xc2 \ x93 ... the English court -LSB- will -RSB- in such circumstances automatically decline to make the garnishee order absolute , on the ground that there is a real risk that a foreign court may , despite payment by the garnishee pursuant to such a garnishee order absolute , nevertheless enforce the attached debt against the garnishee overseas ?
Lord Goff also observed that he doubted whether the answer to his question had much bearing on the question with which the House was concerned , viz , the proper approach to cases where the relevant three criteria are satisfied so as to give rise to an assumption that foreign courts will give effect to the English judgment .
By a freight agreement contained in or evidenced by a fax dated 5 March 1999 addressed to the Defendants the Claimants agreed to transport on their barge from Puerto Ordaz , Venezuela , to Point Lisas , Trinidad , a ship loader and a ship unloader , which are two specialised cranes .
It was contended that this claim was not one in respect of `` loss or damage '' because those words as used in Article III Rule 6 connote loss or damage of or to or in connection with goods - see per Pearson J in Goulandris Brothers Ltd v. B Goldman and Sons Ltd -LSB- 1958 -RSB- 1 QB 74 particularly at page 106 .
Mr Matthews founded particularly upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in Cargill International S.A. v CPN Tankers -LRB- Bermuda -RRB- Ltd. -LRB- The `` Ot Sonja '' -RRB- -LSB- 1993 -RSB- 2 LlR 435 and contended that that decision was binding authority for the propositions -LRB- 1 -RRB- that the meaning of the words loss or damage in Article III Rule 6 was to be harmonised with the established meaning of those words in Article IV -LRB- 2 -RRB- that a wide rather than a narrow construction should be given to the ambit of Article III Rule 6 -LRB- 3 -RRB- that the words are apt to cover goods which are intended to be loaded even though they are never actually loaded and particularly -LRB- 4 -RRB- that the time bar can operate even in respect of an incident prior to loading .
\ t \ tTechint have commenced proceedings in Italy against Aprile and our clients claiming damages in excess of US $ 8,500,000 in respect of the damage to the cranes .
\ tThe charterparty provided for London arbitration and disputes between the parties were referred to Mr Timothy Rayment and Mr George Lugg .
In support of this proposition he cites Lorentzen v White -LRB- 1943 -RRB- 74 Lloyd \ 's LR 161 and The Apollonius , -LSB- 1978 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 53 .
Lord Roskill , with whose speech the other members of the House of Lords agreed , said this -LRB- at p130 -RRB- : `` In truth if cl .13 were to be construed so as to allow a breach of the warranties as to description in cl .26 to be committed or a failure to deliver the vessel at all to take place without financial redress to the charterers , the charter virtually ceases to be a contract for the letting of the vessel and the performance of services by the owners , their master officers and crew in consideration of the payment of time charter hire and becomes no more than a statement of intent by the owners in return for which the charters are obliged to pay large sums by way of hire , though if the owners fail to carry out their promises as to description or delivery are entitled to nothing in lieu .
Between them they had substantial deposits in foreign exchange mainly with Citibank in London and with BCI in Geneva .
\ n In his evidence Mr Konstantatos described how EF was contracted as an introducer of business not only to the claimants , but also to two other financial institutions , IFX -LRB- foreign exchange brokers in London -RRB- and Commerz Bank based in Geneva .
The application appears to have been prepared -LRB- and recommended -RRB- by Mr Patrick Chalmers and initialled by three other members of the Bank on 29 th August .
\ n On the 10th September Mr Chalmers wrote a memorandum to the following effect : \ n \ xc2 \ x93Apostolakis is keen to start trading soon through Eurofinance Athens .
This was in the form of a letter signed by Mr Apostolakis broadly following the lines of the proposal contained in the earlier memorandum : - \ n \ xc2 \ x93Dear Sirs , I take this opportunity to inform you that my previous experience in foreign exchange is with Citibank , Athens , involving physical trading without the use of leverage and I am totally aware of the risks and rewards involved using leverage in the foreign exchange market .
These other banks included Citibank Athens , Alpha Credit Bank and BCI -LRB- Suisse -RRB- in Zurich , Switzerland .
However , it emerged from Mr Apostolakis \ xc2 \ x92 diary -LRB- which was produced just before the trial -RRB- that Mr Apostolakis was on holiday out of Athens during this period -LRB- and indeed in Egypt as from the 15 th August -RRB- .
\ n He also asserted that Mr Konstantatos said in terms that his company , EF , represented SBL in Greece .
\ n The defendants \ xc2 \ x92 response was to pray-in-aid a passage from Professor Beale \ xc2 \ x92s contribution to Beatson & Friedman : Good Faith and Fault in Contract Law -LRB- 1995 -RRB- at p. 245 cited with approval by the Court of Appeal in Director General of Fair Trading v. First National Bank plc -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 2 WLR 1353 at p. 1365 : I suspect that good faith has a double operation .
After lengthy negotiations between the first defendants , a shipowning company owned by the State of Latvia -LRB- Latco -RRB- , and the claimants , a shipyard in Poland -LRB- the Yard -RRB- , Latco arranged for reefer vessels to be built for a specially incorporated Liberian subsidiary , the second defendants -LRB- Latreefers -RRB- with directors provided by an independent Isle of Man service company .
Prior to the break up of the Soviet Union , the ships owned by Latco were effectively operated as part of the Soviet Fleet and most significant commercial decisions were taken in Moscow .
He , in turn , approached Seawave Agencies Limited -LRB- Seawave -RRB- in London , a company which had acted prior to the break up of the Soviet Union for the state owned shipping companies .
I accept the evidence of Mr Engel and Mr Nawrocki that they proceeded on the assumption that Latreefers would be funded by Latco or Latco would arrange for the funding of Latreefers ; they believed that they were dealing with the Latco group who as a company owned by the State of Latvia would perform the contracts .
The initial directors of the company were to be employees of Capco Trust -LRB- Isle of Man -RRB- Limited -LRB- Capco -RRB- a company connected with Isle of Man accountants , David Capps & Co , which provided corporate services at Douglas , Isle of Man .
At the same time Watson Farley & Williams sent to Ms Alexandra Potts of Capco a request that a meeting of Latreefers be held and powers of attorney executed and sent to them as soon as possible .
Ms Alexandra Potts , Mr Philip Hobson and Mr Haydn Brickell , all employees of Capco , were appointed directors of Latreefers .
Mr Hobson was the managing director of Capco and a solicitor who had been in private practice and head of the legal departments of public companies ; Ms Potts and Mr Brickell were also solicitors who had been in private practice before joining Capco .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tMr Henriksen telephoned the London branch of the Christiania Bank on 20 September 1993 and wrote to them on 21 September 1993 setting out terms for the financing required - 60 per cent of the contract price -LRB- a total of US$ 102m -RRB- for a term of 15 years with a US$ 8m balloon per vessel .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ xa2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0In response to that report , Mr John Simpson provided a report for the Yard ; he had been employed in banking since 1971 by the Royal Bank of Scotland and Den norske Bank Group retiring in April 2000 ; he had been in charge of the London office of Den Norske Bank from 1992 where ship finance had formed a substantial part of their business .
\ n \ tOn 22 September 1993 Mr Henriksen sent a fax to Mr Avotins enclosing the responses from Bankers Trust and Banque Internationale \ xc3 \ xa0 Luxembourg .
\ n \ tOn 5 December 1994 , Clarke J granted summary judgment to the Yard against Latreefers for the amount due for the keeling laying instalments of vessels 1 and 2 \ xc2 \ x96 a sum of just over $ 11m and interest ; his judgment is reported at -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 592 .
In the second of these applications , Colman J decided on 6 March 1997 -LRB- reported at -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 228 -RRB- that the Yard should not have permission to amend to claim damages on the basis that Latreefers were in anticipatory repudiatory breach of all six contracts .
\ n \ tAlthough the appeal to the House of Lords primarily concerned the decision of the Court of Appeal , the judgments of Longmore J and Colman J were also considered .
The House of Lords also held that the provision did not make a sale obligatory , as there might be circumstances where a buyer was not available or in which the Yard \ xc2 \ x92s duty to mitigate might require a different course to be taken -LRB- see the speech of Lord Goff at 585 E-H of -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR -RRB- .
There is nothing that takes that right away and clear words would be needed to do so ; in his speech in the House of Lords , Lord Goff referred , at p 585 of -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR , to : \ n \ xc2 \ x93 \ xc2 \ x85the familiar principle of construction that clear words are needed to rebut the presumption that a contracting party does not intend to abandon any remedies for breach of the contract arising by operation of law : see e.g. , Modern Engineering -LRB- Bristol -RRB- Ltd v Gilbert Ash -LRB- Northern -RRB- Limited -LSB- 1974 -RSB- AC 689 at 717 \ xc2 \ x94 \ tLatreefers relied principally on paragraphs -LSB- 3 -RSB- and -LSB- 4 -RSB- which they said were clearly inconsistent with a right to claim damages .
\ tThe possible arguments on this issue were recorded by Lord Goff in his speech at page 586 , but he said that , as no argument had been advanced before the House of Lords , he was not going to express a view .
\ xc2 \ x94 \ tIn the second action begun in 1995 for the instalments due on vessels 3-6 , the Yard did not claim that Latreefers was in repudiatory breach , but in July 1996 served particulars claiming damages for all six vessels on the basis that there had been a repudiation of all six contracts ; these particulars were struck out by Longmore J , though that Order was set aside by the Order of the House of Lords \ n \ tThe position at the conclusion of the appeal to the House of Lords was clear ; the Yard was entitled to plead a claim for damages on a common law basis in respect of vessels 1 and 2 -LRB- see the speech of Lord Goff at p 591-2 -RRB- .
The point was raised by Miss Maxwell at the hearing ; according to a contemporary note , she said that it was necessary for the Yard to plead the breach of contract which Mr Flynn , junior counsel for the Yard , accepted had not been properly pleaded in relation to vessels 1 and 2 ; she reserved her position on any time bar .
\ n \ tLatreefers next contended that any claim for repudiation made in the pleadings before consolidation had been abandoned by the Yard when it did not plead the matter in the consolidated statement of claim served on 6 August 1998 ; they relied on Cargill v Bower -LRB- 1878 -RRB- 10 Ch D 502 at 508 and Lewis & Lewis v Durnford -LRB- 1907 -RRB- 24 TLR 64 .
In response I was referred by the Yard to Burton v MBC -LRB- Builders Ashington -RRB- Ltd -LRB- 1995 -RRB- 69 P&CR 496 and Phelps v Spon Smith -LRB- The Times , 26 November 1999 -RRB- .
It seems to me clear that at the Case Management Conference , although Miss Maxwell was not representing Latreefers , the point being raised was the contract claim and that was what Mr Flynn accepted had not been properly pleaded ; it was a point that needed to be clarified as the trial might include the claim against Latreefers .
The question is whether looking at all the events together , Latreefers were making it clear to the Yard -LRB- or leading the Yard reasonably to believe -RRB- that they were refusing and would refuse to carry out their part of the contract : see the short passages in the speech of Lord Reid in White & Carter Council v McGregor -LSB- 1962 -RSB- AC 413 at 427 and in the judgment of Devlin J in Univeral Cargo Carriers v Citati -LSB- 1957 -RSB- 2 QB at 436 .
\ n \ t Though , as I have set out , Latreefers put forward the submissions I have outlined in seeking to persuade me not to reach the conclusion I set out in the preceding paragraph , Latreefers \ xc2 \ x92 position at the hearing before Clarke J and in the pre-consolidation pleadings accords with the conclusion I have reached : \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ xa2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0At the hearing before Clarke J in December 1994 , they admitted and submitted that they were in repudiatory breach of all six contracts -LRB- see p 602 of -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep -RRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ xa2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Latreefers amended their defence in the first action in February 1995 to admit that they were in repudiatory breach .
Lord Goff said at page 594 of -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR : \ n I prefer to approach the matter on the realistic basis that Colman J 's decision to dispose of the second action in the way he did found its origin in an erroneous decision of the Court of Appeal , which led Colman J mistakenly to believe that the substance of the yard 's claim in this action should be disposed of on an application for leave to amend ; and that on that basis your Lordships ' House should set aside his decision in toto so far as it relates to the second action .
That this argument is of a substantial nature is fortified by Sir Gunther Treitel 's note on the present case -LRB- -LRB- 1998 -RRB- 114 LQR 22 -RRB- ; I wish to add that the point in question did not arise for consideration in Motor Oil Hellas -LRB- Corinth -RRB- Refineries SA v Shipping Corp of India , The Kanchenjunga -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 Lloyd 's Rep 391 , a case relied upon by Colman J in his judgment .
I agree with the conclusion of Clarke J that the Yard did not act unreasonably in so doing -LRB- see p 605 of -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep at 605 -RRB- .
An election once made is irrevocable : see Bentsen v Taylor -LSB- 1893 -RSB- 2 QB 274 at 279 , ERDC Construction v HM Love & Co -LSB- 1994 -RSB- SC 620 at 634 and The Kanchenjunga where Lord Goff said : \ xc2 \ x93 Once an election is made , however , it is final \ xc2 \ x94 .
In Johnson v Agnew -LSB- 1980 -RSB- A.C. 367 , a seller had obtained a summary order for specific performance of a contract for the sale of land against the buyer .
The House of Lords held that the seller was entitled , after the buyer had failed to comply with the order , to apply to court to put an end to the contract and claim damages for breach \ xc2 \ x96 see the speech of Lord Wilberforce at pages 392-4 .
After referring to the speech of Lord Wilberforce in Johnson v Agnew , Mr Sumption QC -LRB- sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court -RRB- said at p 66 : \ n \ xc2 \ x93It does not follow from this analysis that the innocent party may in all cases change his mind after affirming the contract .
Professor Sir Guenter Treitel QC in a note Affirmation after repudiatory breach -LRB- 1998 -RRB- 114 LQR 22 , to which Lord Goff referred in his speech in the House of Lords , considered that affirmation should not necessarily in such cases be regarded as irrevocable .
\ n \ tThey relied on Johnson v Milling -LRB- 1886 -RRB- 16 QBD 460 , United Dominions Trust v Ennis -LSB- 1968 -RSB- QB 54 and Decro-Wall v Practitioners in Marketing -LSB- 1971 -RSB- 1 WLR 361 .
\ tThe Yard put forward its case of direct inducement relying on the first three of the categories summarised in Thomson v Deakin -LSB- 1952 -RSB- Ch 646 and by Neil LJ in Middlebrook Mushrooms v T.G.W .
Their respective shares in the commission of the tort were done in furtherance of that common design : see The Koursk -LSB- 1924 -RSB- P 152 , Unilever v Gillette -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd -LSB- 1989 -RSB- RPC 583 and ICS Ltd v West Bromwich Building Society -LSB- 1999 -RSB- Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Professional Negligence Reports 501 .
\ tLatco submitted that any direct inducement had to operate directly on the party induced to break the contract ; in the case of a company , the company could only be induced by an approach made to a director or other person who had the requisite authority to act for the company ; they relied on the judgment of Sir Raymond Evershed MR in Thomson v Deakin at p 681-2 .
They relied upon the passage in the speech of Lord Reid in Rookes v Barnard -LSB- 1964 -RSB- AC at p 1168-9 where he said : \ xc2 \ x93So long as the defendant only threatens to do what he has a legal right to do , he is on safe ground .
\ n \ tMr Henriksen , who at the time of the trial was in his early forties and had lived in England for a number of years until 1998 , relied in respect of his medical condition on the evidence of two London doctors , Dr Kaye , a cardiologist at the Cromwell Hospital and Dr Jenkins , a consultant cardiologist at the Cromwell Hospital and at St Thomas \ xc2 \ x92 Hospital and on a letter from Mr Henriksen \ xc2 \ x92s physician at the Cardiothorasic centre in Monaco , Dr M Sabatier detailing the arrangements for his treatment in Monaco .
\ n \ tAlthough I give considerable weight to the fact that both Dr Kaye and Dr Jenkins had examined Mr Henriksen and Dr Coltart had not , I must take into account the fact that Mr Henriksen \ xc2 \ x92s medical condition was only put forward as a reason why he would not be giving evidence during the course of the trial , even though the medical condition advanced was one of long standing .
Mr Henriksen then refused to come to London to be examined by Dr Colthart who could not go to Monaco to see him in view of his clinical commitments .
Bearing in my mind the lateness of the issue being raised and the difficulty in which this placed the Yard in finding an eminent cardiologist who could fly to Monaco to examine him , I consider his refusal to come to London unreasonable , particularly as there was no medical evidence that suggested that there was any impediment to him doing so .
No attempt was made to adduce the transcripts of the interviews of Ms Potts and Mr Hobson conducted by the liquidator .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ xa2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0It is clear from a fax from Watson Farley & Williams to Capco dated 6 March 1992 in relation to an unrelated company that terms and conditions identical in all material respects to the 1990 and 1994 terms were in force in 1992 for companies for which Capco provided services .
Capco would have wanted the covenants from the ultimate beneficial owner - Latco , particularly as that was a company with very large assets and was owned by the state of Latvia .
\ tAlthough it is recognised that this principle can cause injustice , the Court of Appeal made it clear in Adams v Cape Industries -LSB- 1990 -RSB- Ch 433 at 536 that a court is not free to disregard this principle , \ n \ xc2 \ x93merely because it considers that justice so requires .
They said this was a reflection of the principle in Said v Butt -LSB- 1920 -RSB- 3 KB 497 , which I consider at paragraph 286 below .
In so far as the decisions were made at the three meetings in New York and Paris referred to in the statement of claim , it matters not that these meetings were called board meetings , rather than general meetings of the plaintiff : see In re Express Engineering Works Ltd .
Reliance was also placed on similar passages in the speeches of Lord Morris of Borth y Gest at p 180 , Viscount Dilhorne at p 187 , Lord Pearson at p 190 and Lord Diplock at 199 .
The formulations of this tort , particularly those in Thomson v Deakin , are all consistent with this .
However no formal agreement is necessary to establish a common design ; a tacit agreement is enough : see Unilever plc v Gillette -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd -LSB- 1989 -RSB- RPC 583 at 609 \ tThere was an alternative claim against him of indirect inducement advanced on the same basis as that against Latco as set out at paragraph 192 .
\ xc2 \ x94 See per Mustill LJ in Unilever It was contended on Mr Henriksen \ xc2 \ x92s behalf that as he did not know of the contract with Capco , he could not be liable if the sole unlawful means were the breach of that contract .
He relied on a short passage in the speech of Lord Reid in Tesco v Nattrass at p 171 : \ n But the board of directors may delegate some part of their functions of management giving to their delegate full discretion to act independently of instructions from them .
\ n -LRB- d -RRB- \ tAgency \ tMr Henriksen \ xc2 \ x92s second point was that , if I concluded that he was acting as an agent of Latreefers or Latco , he was not liable because of the principles relating to agents established in Said v Butt -LSB- 1920 -RSB- 3 KB 497 .
\ tIn subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal -LRB- G Scammell v Nephew Ltd -LSB- 1929 -RSB- 1KB 419 , Thomson v Deakin , and WDA v Export Finance Co -LSB- 1992 -RSB- BCC 270 -RRB- and in decisions of overseas court , McCardie J \ xc2 \ x92s views have been followed .
The dispute between the parties arises in connection with the purported termination in January 1999 by Mobil of a charter agreement made between Maersk and some or all of the defendants for the hire of an anchor handling support vessel for use in connection with drilling activities being undertaken in the North Sea .
\ r \ n \ tOn the 12th July 1995 Mobil entered into an agreement with R & B Falcon -LRB- `` R&B '' -RRB- for the provision of Jack Bates , a mobile off-shore semi-submersible drilling unit .
It was intended the Jack Bates be used by the defendants in connection with drilling in the west of Shetland licence areas .
The engagement of Jack Bates necessitated the chartering of appropriate anchor-handling tug supply vessels and on the 14th May 1996 an invitation to tender in respect of such vessels was distributed on behalf of Mobil to various supply vessel owners including Maersk .
\ r \ n \ tThis led in October 199 to the charter by Mobil from Maersk of an anchor handling vessel known as Maersk Promoter .
\ tIn late 1997 and early 1998 there were discussions between Mobil and Maersk relating to the provision by Maersk , in substitution for Maersk Promoter , of a larger and more sophisticated anchor handling vessel for use in connection with the fifth well of the five firm wells covered by the original agreement .
It was the evidence of Mr Middlehurst called on behalf of Mobil -LRB- who at the relevant time was the West of Britain Drilling and Operations Superintendent -RRB- that during the course of October and November 1998 there was increasing concern on the part of Mobil about the capability of the drilling rig .
A decision was taken by Mobil that Jack Bates should be towed to Invergordon for repairs .
\ r \ n \ tImmediately following the failure of number 7 anchor line , Mobil wrote to R & B as follows : \ r \ n `` We refer to events of the evening of December 14th , 1998 and the early hours of December 15th , 1998 on the Jack Bates necessitating emergency response whereby three anchors were lost two of which were lost complete with chains following the catastrophic failure of their respective mooring lines .
We hereby invoke Clauses 2.3 , 2.5 F and G of the contract and therefore require R & B ... to rectify to the satisfaction of Mobil by no later than 5pm London time on the 20th December namely within 5 days of the date of this letter the defaults in performance and breaches of obligations .
But on the 21st December 1998 Mobil purported to terminate the Jack Bates contract .
On the 6th January 1999 Mobil wrote to Maersk referring to the `` termination '' of the rig contract and giving notice `` in accordance with Clause 4.3 of the Mobil time charter party '' .
\ r \ n \ tBy an Order of this Court dated the 23rd March 2000 the following issues were ordered to be determined : - \ r \ n `` 1 Whether Mobil was entitled to rely on Clause 4.3 of the charterparty and in particular whether mere termination of the Jack Bates agreement was sufficient to give rise to a right to terminate under Clause 4.3 of the charterparty .
In particular -LRB- a -RRB- whether the charter party obliges Mobil to give notice of termination `` immediately '' following termination of Jack Bates rig agreement -LRB- b -RRB- whether if such an obligation existed Mobile complied with it -LRB- c -RRB- accordingly whether Mobil \ 's purported termination was effective or whether it amounted to a repudiatory breach 3 If Mobil validly terminated under Clause 4.3 -LRB- a -RRB- whether termination took place during the `` fifth well and first year '' as contemplated by Clause 4.3 -LRB- 1 -RRB- -LRB- b -RRB- accordingly whether the claimants can rely on Clause 4.3 -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the charter party .
4 If Mobil were not entitled to terminate the charter party in the manner in which it did whether -LRB- a -RRB- in circumstances where the Jack Bates agreement had been terminated , the claimants are not entitled to recover more than is provided for in Clause 4.3 -LRB- 1 -RRB- and -LRB- b -RRB- the claimants were obliged to accept the repudiation of the charter party and claim damages on this basis .
In the meantime Blazer discharged the bulk of Mobil \ 's equipment on board her .
There is a note by Mr Sorensen of that conversation in the documents which reads : - \ r \ n `` Talked to Bill Middlehurst week 53 to discuss the employment of Maersk Blazer during Jack Bates stay at Invergordon .
-LSB- 1 -RSB- She stated that : -LRB- i -RRB- her financial interest in the family home in Guernsey is nil ; -LRB- ii -RRB- her underwriting at Lloyd \ 's was secured by a bank guarantee which was itself secured upon assets provided by Mr L ; -LRB- iii -RRB- this underwriting was done as trustee on behalf of her husband and she had no beneficial interest in her underwriting at Lloyd \ 's nor the facilities that supported it ; -LRB- iv -RRB- the shares that she came to hold in the Claimant -LRB- see below -RRB- are held by her as trustee for Mr L ; -LRB- v -RRB- she owns personal property worth about \ xc2 \ xa35000 .
The Judge granted an order restraining Mrs L from -LRB- i -RRB- removing or dealing with any of her assets in England and Wales up to the value of \ xc2 \ xa3395 ,000 ; -LRB- ii -RRB- disposing or dealing with any of her assets outside England and Wales , including particular assets in Guernsey that were identified .
The usual ancillary orders were also made , including an order that Mrs L must swear an affidavit as to her assets , both in and outside England and Wales .
\ r \ n In support of the first order sought against Mrs L it was contended in Mr Brooks \ ' affidavit -LSB- 2 -RSB- that the effect of Mrs L \ 's disclosure affidavit and schedule of assets was as follows : -LRB- i -RRB- that she was acting as the trustee or agent of her husband in entering into the Agreement for the purchase of the shares and loan stock in the Claimant in July 1997 ; -LRB- ii -RRB- therefore the loan stock , as well as the shares in the Claimant , that were held in her name were held on trust for her husband ; -LRB- iii -RRB- if so , then as a matter of both English and Guernsey law , Mrs L , as trustee or agent , must have a right of indemnity against her husband , as beneficiary or principal , in respect of all liabilities incurred by her in connection with the trust property or her acts as agent on behalf of Mr L as principal ; -LRB- iv -RRB- in the circumstances it would be just to extend the existing freezing order against Mrs L to cover all the assets that Mrs L held on trust for Mr L including the shares in the Claimant and her other underwriting interests .
\ r \ n In support of the freezing order sought against Mr L , it was contended in Mr Brooks \ ' affidavit -LSB- 3 -RSB- that : -LRB- i -RRB- the business affairs of Mr and Mrs L were '' intermingled '' ; -LRB- ii -RRB- Mrs L had a right to indemnity from Mr L in respect of her liability to the Claimant , which had now been transformed into a judgment ; -LRB- iii -RRB- Mrs L also had the right to require Mr L to apply his assets to discharge the judgment debt in favour of the Claimant ; -LRB- iv -RRB- there was a danger of dissipation of the assets of Mr L , so a freezing order should be made against him ; -LRB- v -RRB- he should be joined to the proceedings in order to resolve all matters in dispute between the Claimant and the two defendants and as between the two defendants ; -LRB- vi -RRB- the Court had jurisdiction to grant permission to serve the proceedings on Mr L out of the jurisdiction under CPR Part 6.20 -LRB- 2 -RRB- or -LRB- 3 -RRB- or -LRB- 9 -RRB- .
Moore \ xc2 \ x96 Bick J made the following orders on 21 December 2000 : \ r \ n -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ the varied the freezing order made against Mrs L on 3 November 2000 , so as to extend it to include assets held on trust by Mrs L for her husband and Mrs L \ 's '' right of indemnity against -LSB- Mr -RSB- L in respect of the subject matter of this action and/or the judgment debt herein '' ; -LSB- 4 -RSB- -LRB- 2 -RRB- \ the stood over the application for the appointment of a Receiver over Mrs L \ 's assets , which would be dealt with at a hearing on notice ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- \ the granted a freezing order against Mr L , which extended to his assets in England and Wales and elsewhere .
Alternatively England is not the appropriate place for any proceedings against Mr L , which ought to be brought in Guernsey .
-LRB- 5 -RRB- That a freezing order be made against Mr L -LRB- as Second Defendant in the reconstituted action -RRB- in respect of his assets both in and outside England and Wales ; and -LRB- 6 -RRB- the freezing order against Mrs L , as extended by the order of 21 December 2000 , be continued until judgment or further order .
I am very grateful for the most helpful written and oral submissions of Miss Dias and Mr Wood .
The court has no legal power to grant a freezing order where the Claimant has only a future and contingent right : Veracruz Transportation Inc v VC Shipping Co Inc `` The Veracruz '' ; -LSB- 30 -RSB- Department of Social Security v Butler .
-LSB- 31 -RSB- The `` legal power '' of the Court to grant a freezing order : analysis Miss Dias and Mr Wood both accepted that , so far as they have been able to research the point , an application such as the present has not come before the English Court before .
\ r \ n Whether the object of the freezing order is limited to safeguarding the English Court \ 's process was the subject of the dissenting advice of Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in the Mercedes Benz case .
-LSB- 42 -RSB- Miss Dias submits that I do not need to consider that debate in this case because , she submits , the claim for the freezing order against Mr L is not in order to provide funds for a judgment to be obtained in Guernsey .
At this point Miss Dias relies on the decision of the High Court of Australia in Cardile v LED Builders Pty Limited -LRB- `` the Cardile case '' -RRB- .
\ r \ n The case in the High Court of Australia The Cardiles and Ultra appealed to the High Court of Australia .
The principal ground of appeal was that the Court did not have jurisdiction to make a freezing order against the Cardiles or Ultra where -LRB- i -RRB- there was no cause of action against any of them ; -LRB- ii -RRB- the judgment debtor -LRB- Eagle -RRB- had no proprietary interest in any of the assets of the Cardiles or Ultra ; and -LRB- iii -RRB- their property was not available to satisfy any future judgment against Eagle .
The High Court accepted that , with one exception , the Cardiles and Ultra had not been shown to have come into possession of any of Eagle \ 's property ; nor was there any evidence that they were about to do so .
The High Court concluded that the payment of the dividends by Eagle was a non \ xc2 \ x96 commercial exercise .
The High Court agreed with the judge at first instance that the object of the dividend was to limit the funds of Eagle available to meet a judgment in favour of LED .
\ r \ n It seems to me that the High Court of Australia has stated that , in Australia , the assets of a third party can be frozen in aid of enforcing a pending or actual judgment , even where those assets are not beneficially owned by the actual or potential judgment debtor .
The House of Lords restored the order of Kerr J and set aside the order for a `` Mareva '' injunction .
The House of Lords held -LRB- reversing the Court of Appeal -RRB- that the Court had jurisdiction to grant such an interlocutory injunction , although it upheld the Court of Appeal on the exercise of its discretion not to grant an injunction .
In the Court of Appeal it was argued for Mrs Aiyela that , as there could be no claim for substantive relief against her , the Court had no jurisdiction to make a freezing order over her assets .
Secondly whether the Hong Kong court had territorial jurisdiction over him , given that he was resident in Monaco and that there was no claim for any substantive relief against him -LRB- or any other entity -RRB- in the Hong Kong action .
He dealt with the `` legal powers '' point first and concluded that the Hong Kong court had the power to grant a freezing order against the assets of Mr Leiduck in Hong Kong , in aid of the prospective judgment in the proceedings against him in Monaco .
-LSB- 102 -RSB- Lord Nicholls also held that , on his view of the correct interpretation of the Hong Kong rules of court , they permitted service of proceedings out of the jurisdiction on a defendant when the only claim was for an injunction in aid of prospective judgment in a foreign jurisdiction .
Miss Dias submits that the Court has power to join Mr L under CPR Part 19.2 .
Miss Dias submits that it is desirable to add Mr L as a party because there may well be a dispute on whether the Court should appoint a Receiver to enforce the right of indemnity that the Claimant says Mrs L has against Mr L and his assets .
the judgment that has been obtained against Mrs L. \ r \ n Mr Wood submits that the Court has no jurisdiction to join Mr L to the current action under CPR Part 19.2 -LRB- 2 -RRB- because there can not now be any '' matters in dispute in the proceedings '' as judgment in default has already been given against Mrs L. Therefore there can not be any issue involving the potential new party -LRB- Mr L -RRB- in respect of which it is '' desirable to add the new party so that the court can resolve all matters in dispute in the proceedings '' .
The first was Att \ xc2 \ x96 Gen v Corporation of Birmingham , -LSB- 112 -RSB- in which the Court of Appeal had refused permission to substitute the successor corporation for the defendant some five years after judgment had been obtained for a perpetual injunction .
The second case was Munster v Cox , -LSB- 113 -RSB- in which the House of Lords had refused permission to change the name of the defendant in a judgment so that execution could be issued against another partner of the firm of which the defendant was also a partner .
\ r \ n Mr Wood accepted that if I concluded that the Court had jurisdiction to join Mr L , then there were no discretion arguments against joinder other than those that could be made on the territorial jurisdiction issue .
Once that asset is gathered in , the right must be exercised in the Guernsey Courts -LRB- as Miss Dias accepts -RRB- ; it is only if that claim succeeds that Mr L \ 's assets become relevant .
-LRB- iii -RRB- Those assets may be either in England and Wales or in Guernsey .
Overall Conclusions on Mr L \ 's Application to set aside the orders made against him by Moore \ xc2 \ x96 Bick J on 21 December 2000 and the Claimant \ 's First Application My conclusions are : -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThat the Court has the legal power to grant a freezing order against Mr L .
The first was Partington v Hawthorne .
\ r \ n The next case was Hammond v Schofield .
Wills J did not discuss the possible effect of the Rules of Court , nor was Partington v Hawthorne referred to in his judgment .
\ r \ n Next Mr Wood relied on Cross & Co v Matthews and Wallace .
\ r \ n The last case relied on for the `` merger '' argument is Parr v Snell .
-LSB- 132 -RSB- But , he submitted , it was possible for a person to elect to sue the agent to judgment and , if so , the principal can not be sued thereafter , even if judgment against the agent is set aside : Cross & Co v Matthews and Wallace .
\ r \ n Once again I am very grateful for the most helpful and interesting written and oral submissions of Miss Dias and Mr Wood .
This was sworn in response to the freezing order of Moore \ xc2 \ x96 Bick J dated 3 November 2000 , which was directed solely against the assets of Mrs L. \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 2 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis was Mr Brooks \ xc2 \ x92 Second Affidavit , sworn on 18 December 2000 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 12 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSee the letter of 10 August 2000 from Babbe , Le Pelley Tostevin , the Guernsey lawyers for the Claimant to Eversheds , referred to in paragraph 13.1 of Mr Brooks \ xc2 \ x92 first affidavit of 20 October 2000 in support of the original freezing order against Mrs L. \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 13 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tAs to English law , see eg : Underhill & Hayton : Law of Trusts and Trustees -LRB- 15 Ed -RRB- at page 799 ; Hardoon v Belilos -LSB- 1901 -RSB- AC 118 at 123 \ xc2 \ x96 124 per Lord Lindley .
As to Guernsey law , a letter from Babbe , Le Pelley Tostevin dated 12 December 2000 was put in evidence by the Claimant .
An attendance note of Mr Davenport of Eversheds -LRB- on Mr Andrew Laws of Babbe Le Pelley Tostevin -RRB- states that Guernsey law generally followed English law principles of agency as set out in Bowstead .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 15 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSee the discussion of the principles in the speech of Lord Goff of Chieveley in Firma C \ xc2 \ x96 Trade SA v Newcastle P&I Association -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 2 AC 1 at 35 \ xc2 \ x96 36 and also in the speech of Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle at pages 40 \ xc2 \ x96 42 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 16 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t Mclaine Watson & Co Ltd v International Tin Council -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 3 All ER 787 at 792 \ xc2 \ x96 794 per Millett J \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 17 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSee the Babbe , Le Pelley Tostevin letter of 12 December 2000 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 20 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSee : Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Bank Ltd v Medway Upper Navigation Co -LSB- 1905 -RSB- 2 KB 359 -LRB- CA -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 21 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis section gives the court jurisdiction to grant interim relief when proceedings have been or are to be started in a Brussels or Lugano Convention state .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 25 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis was the phrase used by Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in his dissenting advice in Mercedes Benz AG v Leiduck -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 AC 284 at 305E .
Mr Wood also relied on the decision of Rix J in The \ xc2 \ x93XING SU HAI \ xc2 \ x94 -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 15 at 24 \ xc2 \ x96 25 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 30 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 353 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 31 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 WLR 1528 at 1536H per Evans LJ ; 1540C per Morritt LJ ; 1542A per Simon Brown LJ \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 32 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1AC 284 at 305G \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 33 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tOf course the right to an indemnity in this circumstance would arise upon B becoming liable to A for the debt ; it would not have to wait until A had obtained judgment against B : see the Firma \ xc2 \ x96 C Trade case -LRB- supra -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 34 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 2 AC 284 at 299F \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 35 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t page 299H \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 36 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1978 -RSB- AC 211 at 253D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 37 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 Ch 13 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 38 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tAs opposed to an order made pursuant to section 25 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 .
Lord Mustill , in giving the advice of the majority of the Privy Council , stated that the majority did not wish to express any conclusion on the \ xc2 \ x93legal power \ xc2 \ x94 issue dealt with by Lord Nicholls : see page 304G \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 41 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t At page 310A \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 42 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t At pages 309 \ xc2 \ x96 310 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 57 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 40 of the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 58 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis is a quotation from the joint judgment of Brennan CJ , McHugh , Gummow , Kirby and Heyne JJ of the High Court of Australia in Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty v Maritime Union of Australia -LRB- No 3 -RRB- -LRB- 1998 -RRB- ALR 643 at 658 \ xc2 \ x96 9 , which the Court approved at Para 42 in the Cardile case as a \ xc2 \ x93 correct statement of principle \ xc2 \ x94 , subject to two matters .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 59 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 50 of the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 60 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tParas 50 and 51 of the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 61 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 54 of the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 62 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tIdentified as a phrase used by Deane J in Jackson v Sterling Industries Ltd -LRB- 1987 -RRB- 162 CLR 612 at 625 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 63 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 57 of the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 64 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 64 in the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 65 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 69 in the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 66 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 70 in the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 67 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 75 in the joint judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 68 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 120 in the judgment of Kirby J .
In a footnote -LRB- No 189 -RRB- one of the \ xc2 \ x93 judicial dicta \ xc2 \ x94 referred to is statement of Lord Diplock in the Siskina case at pages 254 - 6 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 69 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tPara 121 in the judgment , per Kirby J \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 70 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThe phrase is that of Hoffmann LJ in Aiyela : see page 376D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 71 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tParagraph 57 -LRB- ii -RRB- of the joint judgment and paragraphs 120 and 121 of Kirby J \ xc2 \ x92s judgment \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 72 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1979 -RSB- AC 211 , particularly at 253 \ xc2 \ x96 257 per Lord Diplock , with whom Lords Hailsham , Simon , Russell and Keith agreed \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 73 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThat provided : \ xc2 \ x93 -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ xc2 \ x85.service of a writ \ xc2 \ x85out of the jurisdiction is permissible with the leave of the court \ xc2 \ x85 .
Lord Diplock referred to and approved the \ xc2 \ x93 classic \ xc2 \ x94 judgment of Cotton LJ in North London Railway Co v Great Northern Railway Co -LRB- 1883 -RRB- 11 QBD 30 at 39 - 40 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 79 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 257B \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 80 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThe judgment of the House of Lords was given on 26 October 1977 ; the Mareva case had been heard and decided on 23 June 1975 : -LSB- 1975 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 509 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 81 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis confirmed the freezing order jurisdiction against a party who was within the jurisdiction , as well as one who was outside it .
But injunctions in aid of execution were well established long before : Bullus v Bullus -LRB- 1910 -RRB- 102 LT 399 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 83 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1985 -RSB- 1 WLR 876 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 84 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSee the Babanaft case -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 Ch 13 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 85 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 342H \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 86 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tMy emphasis \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 87 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 343B \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 88 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 343C-D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 89 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis assumes all other necessary tests for the grant of an interlocutory injunction are fulfilled \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 90 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThe cases were : Castanho v Brown & root -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd -LSB- 1981 -RSB- AC 557 ; British Airways Board v Laker Airways Ltd -LSB- 1985 -RSB- AC 58 ; South Carolina Insurance Co v Assurantie Maatschappij \ xc2 \ x93De Zeven Provincient \ xc2 \ x94 NV -LSB- 1987 -RSB- AC 24 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 91 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 362A-B \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 92 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 362C-D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 93 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 363C-D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 94 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tReliance was placed on the Siskina case .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 95 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tAt -LSB- 1993 -RSB- AC 334 at 362C - D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 96 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThat is the one against Mr Aiyela : -LSB- 1994 -RSB- QB 366 at 374H \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 97 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LRB- 1910 -RRB- 102 LT 399 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 98 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t At page 376G \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 99 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t At page 377E \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 100 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 AC 284 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 101 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tOriginally there were also claims against the Hong Kong company but those were discontinued \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 102 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tS see page 310A \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 103 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 314A \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 104 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t See page 304G \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 105 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tLord Mustill did not refer specifically to the Channel Tunnel case in his advice , but that is clearly a part of the series of such cases .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 106 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep353 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 107 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSee the Firma \ xc2 \ x96 C Trade case , referred to at footnote 15 above \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 108 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1993 -RSB- AC 334 at 343C-D and 362C-D respectively \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 109 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 2 Lloyds Rep 15 at 23 - 24 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 110 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThe wording of CPR Part 19.4 -LRB- 2 -RRB- -LRB- a -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 111 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThe wording of CPR Part 19.4 -LRB- 2 -RRB- -LRB- b -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 112 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LRB- 1880 -RRB- 15 Ch D 423 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 113 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LRB- 1885 -RRB- 10 App Cas 680 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 114 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tConsidered by the House of Lords in Cox v Munster -LRB- supra -RRB- and the Court of Appeal in A-G v Corporation of Birmingham -LRB- supra -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 115 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 AC 284 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 116 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tMy emphasis on \ xc2 \ x93 the \ xc2 \ x94 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 117 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThis can be done because CPR Part 6.18 -LRB- h -RRB- and -LRB- i -RRB- define \ xc2 \ x93 claim form \ xc2 \ x94 and \ xc2 \ x93 claim \ xc2 \ x94 respectively as including \ xc2 \ x93 application notice \ xc2 \ x94 and \ xc2 \ x93 application \ xc2 \ x94 respectively \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 118 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tThat provides : \ xc2 \ x93 The court will not give permission unless satisfied that England and Wales is the proper place to bring the claim \ xc2 \ x94 , or in this case , the application against Mr L. \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 119 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tMr Wood relied on the comments of Lord Donaldson MR in Rosseel NV v Oriental Commercial Shipping Ltd -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 1 WLR 1387 at 1389C - D \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 120 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1996 -RSB- 1 AC 284 at 298G \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 121 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tI assume that there will be a substitute omnibus application notice \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 122 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 1 All ER 36 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 123 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tIn any case CPR Part 6.20 -LRB- 17 -RRB- now deals specifically with permission to serve a claim for a costs order under section 51 of the SCA 1981 out of the jurisdiction \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 124 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 1 FCR 80 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 125 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t CPR Part 13.3 -LRB- 1 -RRB- -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- i -RRB- .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 126 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t CPR Part 13.3 -LRB- 2 -RRB- states that the issue of whether there was a prompt application to set aside the judgment must be specifically considered by the Court in deciding whether to exercise its power \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 127 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LRB- 1888 -RRB- JP 807 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 128 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1891 -RSB- 1 QB 453 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 129 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t At page 455 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 130 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LRB- 1904 -RRB- 91 LT 500 -LRB- Div Court -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 131 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1923 -RSB- 1 KB 1 -LRB- CA -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 132 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1985 -RSB- 1Ch 457 -LRB- CA -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 133 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LRB- 1904 -RRB- 91 LT 500 -LRB- Div Court -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 134 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ t -LSB- 1985 -RSB- 1 Ch 457 : at page 483 \ xc2 \ x96 488 and 492 per Stephenson LJ ; page 494 per May LJ ; page 500 \ xc2 \ x96 501 per Slade LJ \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 135 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ tSet out at para 99 above \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- .
The contract was on cost and freight -LRB- CFR -RRB- terms calling for delivery by PMI at Moerdijk , Rotterdam .
The butadiene was loaded in Santa Clara and Rio Grande in Brazil and carried to San Lorenzo Argentina .
after it was known that on arrival in Europe the vessel \ xc2 \ x92s cargo had been found to be very seriously contaminated , at 1710 hours on 24 June a Mr Sura of SGS telephonically advised both PMI -LRB- in the person of Mr Maya -RRB- and Vinmar -LRB- described in this document addressed to Miss Theresa Bigg as \ xc2 \ x93your good selves \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- that \ xc2 \ x93the analysis in the first two tanks failed to meet the specification \ xc2 \ x94 .
\ n \ tDuring the course of 25 June Miss Bigg received a telephone call in her office from Mr Chapman of SGS Mexico .
\ n \ tThe vessel arrived at Moerdijk on 13 July 1995 and berthed at the Shell facility .
As a result of the contamination Shell refused to accept the cargo into their facilities and BP refused to accept the cargo pursuant to their contract with Vinmar .
Further sampling took place either at Moerdijk or whilst the vessel was at anchor off the Hook of Holland .
The bill of lading was endorsed by BP to Vinmar and by Vinmar to Norsk Hydro .
Mr Severn said that it is very very difficult to draw a representative sample and I did not understand Mr Payne to dissent from this proposition .
\ n \ tThe conduct of those for whom the Claimants are responsible can not be regarded as breaking the chain of causation between the admitted breach of contract and the loss to the exclusion of any efficacy of the breach - see per Devlin J in Heskell - v - Continental Express -LSB- 1950 -RSB- 1 All ER1033 at 1048 .
Moreover there was confusion on this issue - the Pemex letter of protest referred to a maximum permitted propylene plus content of 15ppm by weight whereas the GS letters referred to 10ppm by volume a matter which had confused even Mr Payne when writing his first report .
Lord Macmillan in Banco de Portugal - v - Waterlow -LSB- 1932 -RSB- AC 452 at page 506 said this : - \ n \ t \ xc2 \ x93Where the sufferer from a breach of contract finds himself in consequence of that breach placed in a position of embarrassment the measures which he may be driven to adopt in order to extricate himself ought not to be weighed in nice scales at the instance of the party whose breach of contract has occasioned the difficulty .
After the hearing of argument , the Court awaited the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of The Starsin .
The ELPA is a bulk carrier , chartered by the Owners to Charterers on an amended New York Produce Exchange Form for a one time charter trip from the Black Sea to the East coast of Mexico .
It was a holding company for all the businesses controlled by Luis Noboa external to his place of residence , Ecuador , and it was incorporated in the Bahamas .
Harrington is incorporated in Bermuda .
1.4 The second defendant -LRB- `` Earth '' -RRB- and the fifth Defendant -LRB- `` Water '' -RRB- are both incorporated in the Bahamas and are both currently controlled indirectly by Alvaro .
1.5 In the course of 1993-4 Luis Noboa transferred the beneficial ownership of practically the entire issued share capital of FSL to his second wife -LRB- `` Mercedes '' -RRB- , who was the step-mother of Maria Elena , Isabel and Alvaro , to Maria Elena and Isabel and to their sister , Diana .
The shares were distributed as to -LRB- i -RRB- 48 per cent to a company owned and / or controlled by Mercedes -LRB- `` St. Etienne '' -RRB- , -LRB- ii -RRB- 4 per cent to a company called Cairncross Inc. owned by a trust , the Cairncross Trust , to be held for Mercedes during her life and after her death on behalf of Maria Elena -LRB- 1.5 per cent -RRB- and a grandson of Luis Noboa -LRB- `` Luchito '' -RRB- -LRB- 1per cent -RRB- , -LRB- iii -RRB- 48 per cent to a trust , the Tarland Trust , to be held for the benefit of Maria Elena , Isabel and Diana in equal shares .
In the result Mercedes was beneficially interested in 52 per cent of FSL -LRB- 480 Ordinary shares and 480 B shares -RRB- together with a life interest in 40 ordinary shares and 40 B shares , and Maria Elena , Isabel and Diana were each interested in 160 ordinary shares and 160 B shares .
1.7 It is alleged by the claimants - and must be accepted for the purpose of these applications - that Alvaro was not prepared to accept his exclusion from FSL and he therefore took various steps both before and after his father \ 's death to exclude his step-mother , Mercedes , from FSL and to enable him to intervene in and take over ownership and/or control of the company .
Amongst those steps was the commencement of legal proceedings in Ecuador by which he challenged the so - called sociedad conjugal between Luis Noboa and Mercedes and its dissolution before Luis Noboa \ 's death by which means Luis Noboa had put himself in a position to distribute the share capital in FSL in the manner already described .
In the course of December 1996 Alvaro informed Mercedes that if she wished to escape the political pressure which Alvaro had procured to be exerted on her she must sell her shares in FSL to him .
1.8 Mercedes was unwilling to sell out to Alvaro and he therefore tried to induce Maria Elena and Isabel to help him to persuade Mercedes to relinquish her FSL shares .
Alvaro agreed to end the legal proceedings in Ecuador .
1.11 On or about 6th and 9th January 1997 , about the same time as , or immediately following the agreement of Mercedes to sell her FSL shares under what came to be the Master Agreement , Alvaro , who is a qualified lawyer , persuaded Maria Elena and Isabel and their husbands to meet him in Guayaquil , Ecuador .
Rather , Alvaro , Isabel and Maria Elena would jointly exercise such power and control .
All material decision-making in relation to FSL would be on the basis of the consent of all of them ; -LRB- 5 -RRB- in order to ensure that there should be parity both in relation to ownership and control of their respective holdings : -LRB- a -RRB- Alvaro would not , without the consent of Maria Elena and Isabel , seek to acquire any additional shares in FSL -LRB- nor would he sell any shares without their consent -RRB- ; -LRB- b -RRB- Alvaro would not seek to vote any shares to be issued or distributed to or for the benefit of Maria Leonor and/or her minor children provided that Maria Elena and Isabel would not seek to vote the shares held by Tarland -LRB- over which they exercised voting control -RRB- .
1.14 The details of the compensation to be paid to Mercedes and the other consideration for her relinquishing her shares in FSL were the subject of an agreement arrived at on 26th January 1997 with the assistance of a mediator , Dr. Leon Febres-Cordero -LRB- `` the Febres-Cordero Agreement '' -RRB- and entered into by Mercedes , Alvaro on his own behalf and on behalf of Maria Leonor , Maria Elena , and Isabel on their own behalf and on behalf of their sister Diana .
Implementation included the renunciation by Mercedes of her rights to any part of the estate of Luis Noboa in favour of his children -LRB- excluding one son -RRB- , but including Alvaro , payment of the consideration for that renunciation to Mercedes and the termination of all litigation -LRB- necessarily including Alvaro \ 's proceedings in relation to the sociedad conjugal between his father and Mercedes -RRB- .
1.15 At numerous meetings at Guayaquil during the period 23rd to 30th January 1997 between Alvaro , Maria Elena and Isabel those three agreed in principle how Isabel was to be compensated for relinquishing most of her interest in FSL and how her shares were to be re-distributed .
1.16 The following day , 31st January 1997 , at a further meeting at Guayaquil , Maria Elena and Isabel signed a document indicating how the entire share capital of FSL relinquished by Mercedes and Isabel should be re-distributed .
The result of that agreement was that -LRB- i -RRB- 25 % of FSL would be held by or for the benefit of Maria Elena ; -LRB- ii -RRB- 25.1 % of FSL would be held by or for the benefit of Alvaro ; -LRB- iii -RRB- 25 % of FSL would be held in trust by or for the benefit of Maria Leonor and her minor children until they reached the age of 30 ; -LRB- iv -RRB- 1 % of FSL would be held jointly by or for the benefit of Maria Elena and Alvaro for later distribution ; -LRB- v -RRB- 3 % of FSL would be held by or for the benefit of Isabel ; -LRB- vi -RRB- 16 % of the shares would be held by Tarland for Diana ; -LRB- vii -RRB- 1.9 % of the shares would be held by a trust and a company for Luchito ; -LRB- viii -RRB- 3 % of the shares would be held for the benefit of another brother and his children .
Importantly , it is further alleged in the particulars of claim that at the meeting on 31st January and at a further meeting held some days later Alvaro warranted and represented that : -LRB- i -RRB- he did not wish , and would not seek , to exercise power or control in relation to FSL alone ; rather , Alvaro and Maria Elena would jointly exercise such power and control , and all decision making in relation to FSL would be on the basis of the consent of both of them ; -LRB- ii -RRB- although he represented the interests of Maria Leonor and her minor children , any shares which Maria Elena and Isabel agreed should be issued or distributed for the benefit of Maria Leonor and/or her minor children were to be , and would be , held on trust until the minor children reached 30 years of age ; -LRB- iii -RRB- he would not without the consent of Maria Elena and Isabel seek to acquire any additional shares in FSL -LRB- including those to be distributed to or for the benefit of Maria Leonor and/or her minor children -RRB- and he would not without her consent sell any shares either ; -LRB- iv -RRB- he would not seek to vote any shares to be issued or distributed for the benefit of Maria Leonor and/or her minor children provided that Maria Elena and Isabel would not seek to vote the shares held by Tarland -LRB- over which they exercised voting control -RRB- .
This exercise involved three aspects : -LRB- i -RRB- the drafting and execution of the Master Agreement , one of the main purposes of which was to provide for Mercedes to relinquish her interest in and to transfer back to FSL her shares in that company and for the consideration which she was to receive ; -LRB- ii -RRB- the drafting and execution of an agreement to give effect to the 30th January agreement in principle relating to Isabel \ 's disposal back to FSL of most of her shareholding ; -LRB- iii -RRB- the drafting and execution of an agreement to give effect to the sisters \ ' agreement in principle made on 31st January in relation to the redistribution by FSL of the shares to be transferred to it by Mercedes and Isabel to those other interests who were to receive them , including in particular Alvaro , Maria Leonor and Luchito .
1.19 The lawyers therefore prepared three Share Distribution Agreements , each of which provided for FSL to sell and distribute at US$ 2.86 per share 250 Ordinary shares and 250 B shares to Earth -LRB- Alvaro \ 's vehicle -RRB- , 251 Ordinary shares and 251 B shares to Water -LRB- Maria Leonor \ 's vehicle -RRB- , 10 Ordinary shares and 10 B shares to Wind -LRB- Alvaro \ 's and Maria Elena \ 's joint interest -RRB- and 30 Ordinary shares and 30 B shares to Fire -LRB- the vehicle of the other brother Lucho -RRB- .
It is further to be noted that by 25th February 1997 Alvaro , Maria Elena and Isabel and the Hanover Trust and Brunswick Trust had all executed the Master Agreement in the space of two days .
The parties to it were FSL , Maria Elena , Isabel , Alvaro , Tarland -LRB- the ninth defendant -RRB- , Codan -LRB- as trustee of the Brunswick Trust -LRB- Isabel \ 's interest -RRB- and of the Hanover Trust -LRB- Maria Elena \ 's interest -RRB- and Pembroke -LRB- the eighth defendant -RRB- as nominee for Codan -RRB- .
The parties to the three agreements were : -LRB- i -RRB- FSL , Dressage -LRB- the fourth claimant -RRB- , Earth , Water , Wind , Fire and Tarland , this being conveniently referred to as `` Diana \ 's SDA '' ; -LRB- ii -RRB- FSL , Dressage , Earth , Water , Wind , Fire , Pembroke -LRB- as nominee for Codan as trustee of the Brunswick Trust -RRB- and Codan -LRB- as trustee of the Brunswick Trust -RRB- , this being conveniently referred to as `` Isabel \ 's SDA '' .
-LRB- iii -RRB- FSL , Dressage , Earth , Water , Wind , Fire , Codan -LRB- as trustee of the Hanover Trust -RRB- and Pembroke -LRB- as nominee for Codan as trustee of the Hanover Trust -RRB- , this being conveniently referred to as `` Maria Elena \ 's SDA '' .
By these agreements it was agreed that 616 of the 625 Ordinary and B shares sold back to FSL should be sold at par -LRB- US$ 2.86 per share -RRB- as follows : -LRB- i -RRB- 251 Ordinary and 251 B shares to be sold to Earth -LRB- Alvaro \ 's vehicle -RRB- ; -LRB- ii -RRB- 250 Ordinary and 250 B shares to be sold to Water -LRB- Maria Leonor \ 's trust vehicle -RRB- ; -LRB- iii -RRB- 10 Ordinary and 10 B shares to be sold to Wind -LRB- Maria Elena \ 's and Alvaro \ 's joint share vehicle -RRB- ; -LRB- iv -RRB- 30 Ordinary and 30 B shares to be sold to Fire -LRB- the vehicle for the other brother , Lucho -RRB- ; -LRB- v -RRB- 75 Ordinary and 75 B shares to be sold to Dressage -LRB- Maria Elena \ 's vehicle -RRB- .
1.24 Following completion under the Master Agreement , the Brunswick Agreement and the three April Share Distribution Agreements the total issued shares of FSL were held as follows representing the following percentages of the total : -LRB- i -RRB- Isabel Interests \ t30 shares \ t3 % -LRB- ii -RRB- Diana Interests \ t160 shares \ t16 % -LRB- iii -RRB- Maria Elena \ t250 shares \ t25 % -LRB- partly through Dressage - 75 -RRB- -LRB- iv -RRB- Alvaro \ t \ t251 shares \ t25 .1 % -LRB- through Earth -RRB- -LRB- v -RRB- Maria Leonor \ t250 shares \ t25 % -LRB- through Water -RRB- -LRB- vi -RRB- Lucho \ t \ t30 shares \ t3 % -LRB- through Fire -RRB- -LRB- vii -RRB- Luchito \ t \ t19 shares \ t1 .9 % -LRB- viii -RRB- Maria Elena and Alvaro jointly \ t \ t \ t10 shares \ t1 % -LRB- through Wind -RRB- 1.25 The Master Agreement , the Brunswick Agreement and the three Share Distribution Agreements all contained terms referring all disputes to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Commercial Court in England .
1.26 It is alleged that , but for Alvaro \ 's representations , Maria Elena would never have consented to and/or requested and/or authorised and/or recommended Codan -LRB- as trustee -RRB- and/or Pembroke -LRB- as nominee -RRB- and/or Dressage and/or Tarland and/or FSL to enter into the three -LRB- SDA \ 's -RRB- .
1.29 The primary remedy claimed by Maria Elena , Harrington and Dressage -LRB- they being her vehicles for holding the FSL shares -RRB- is rescission of the three April Share Distribution Agreements , and , if necessary , the February Share Distribution Agreements , on account of the fraudulent misrepresentations made by Alvaro .
That claim was brought in Codan \ 's capacity as trustee of the Brunswick Trust of which Isabel was the beneficiary .
In the further alternative Maria Elena and/or Harrington claim damages against Alvaro for deceit alternatively breach of contract , alternatively in lieu of rescission .
2.1 There are applications by Alvaro , Earth and Water for the claim for rescission to be struck out under CPR 3.4.2 , alternatively for summary judgment under CPR 24.2 dismissing the claim for rescission .
There is an application by FSL that service of the claim form against it in London and the order of Mr Justice Longmore of 1st February 2000 granting leave to serve process upon FSL in the Bahamas and the service of it there be set aside .
It is submitted on behalf of Alvaro , Earth and Water that the rescission claim should be struck out because the Particulars of Claim disclose no reasonable grounds for the claim for rescission and/or that such claim is an abuse of process or is otherwise likely to obstruct the just disposal of the proceedings .
He referred at para 90 to a passage from the judgment of Lord Woolf MR in Swain v. Hillman -LSB- 2001 -RSB- 1 All ER 91 ,92 : `` Under r24 .2 , the court now has a very salutary power , both to be exercised in a claimant \ 's favour or , where appropriate , in a defendant \ 's favour .
At para 93 Lord Hope cited Lord Woolf \ 's `` further guidance in Swain v. Hillman , at pages 94-95 : `` It is important that a judge in appropriate cases should make use of the powers contained in Part 24 .
As Lord Woolf said in Swain v. Hillman , at p95 that is not the object of the rule .
It is to be observed that Lord Hope referred to the remarks of Lord Templeman in Williams and Herbert Ltd v W&H Trade Marks -LRB- Jersey -RRB- Ltd -LSB- 1986 -RSB- AC 368 at 435H-436A - that if an application to strike out involves a prolonged and serious argument the judge should , as a general rule , decline to proceed with the argument unless he not only harbours doubts about the soundness of the pleading , but in addition , is satisfied that striking out will obviate the necessity for a trial or will substantially reduce the burden of preparing for the trial or the burden of the trial itself .
The hearing , in the House of Lords , I am told , lasted about four weeks and Lord Hope noted at para 11 that the claimants \ ' written case extended to 385 pages and that of the Bank to 737 pages , there being also nearly 1000 pages of documents .
The most recent decision of the House of Lords on this area is Seaconsar Ltd v. Bank Markazi -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 AC 438 .
It is clear that Lord Goff founded his analysis of the required evidential burden as to the merits of the claim on the speech of Lord Davey in Chemische Fabrik Vormals Sandoz v. Badische Anilin und Soda Fabriks -LRB- 1904 -RRB- 90 LT 733 at 735 and in particular the following passage cited at p451 by Lord Goff : `` An injunction is sought to restrain the defendants from doing some act within the jurisdiction .
If this is correct , it not only disposes of that issue in favour of Alvaro , Earth and Water , but also of the issue as to service out in favour of FSL .
-LRB- iii -RRB- That the April Share Distribution Agreements were an inseparable part of a larger bargain between the siblings is demonstrated beyond dispute by the following : -LRB- a -RRB- The agreement formalised in the Master Agreement that FSL should buy out Mercedes and , on the part of Alvaro , to abandon his legal proceedings in Ecuador and his other efforts to dislodge her from the company would never have been entered into in the absence of a contemporaneous agreement as to the proportions in which her shares in FSL were to be redistributed amongst the siblings , it being the overt common intention that Alvaro should have an interest and some management role in the company .
-LRB- d -RRB- The evidence that the Master Agreement already signed by Alvaro , Maria Elena and Isabel was held by Mr Cephas , Alvaro \ 's United States attorney , on instructions from Alvaro that it should not be released for signature to Mercedes until the share distribution agreement had been signed corroborates the otherwise obvious interdependence of those agreements .
That evidence could have been but was not challenged by the claimants \ ' Bermuda solicitor , Mr Anderson of Conyers Dill & Pearman .
-LRB- h -RRB- In the New York proceedings by Maria Elena and Isabel against Alvaro for rescission of the Share Distribution Agreements and breach of and specific performance of the alleged promises by Alvaro regarding management and control of FSL the complaint stated : `` Mrs Noboa \ 's agreement to relinquish her interest in FSL was part of a larger arrangement among the siblings to redistribute the shares of FSL to allow Luis Noboa \ ' children who were excluded by Luis Noboa from any interest in FSL to share in the ownership of the company .
And in the London proceedings brought by Codan to enforce the consideration provisions of the Brunswick Agreement , to which I have already referred , it was accepted on behalf of Codan -LRB- Isabel \ 's trustee -RRB- that it could not claim rescission of any other of the agreements in view of the fact that it asserted its right to payment under the Brunswick Agreement .
However , it was not alleged that the representations were made by Alvaro to any party or to the agent of any relevant party to either the Diana or the Isabel SDA other than , in the latter case , Isabel herself who now concedes that she never believed in their truth .
However , the complaint in the New York proceedings in which Maria Elena and Isabel claimed rescission of the Share Distribution Agreements against Alvaro had been served on 3rd November 1998 .
Subsequently , just before the commencement of the hearing of these applications , the claimants circulated draft amended particulars of claim in which they introduced at para 41B : '' To the extent necessary , the Claimants will contend that : -LRB- 1 -RRB- the warranties and/or representations made by Alvaro were made on his own behalf and/or as agent for and/or on behalf of any company that he would procure to execute the Share Distribution Agreements and/or the \ ` February SDAs \ ' -LRB- namely , Earth and/or Water and/or Wind and/or Fire -RRB- ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- such warranties and/or representations were addressed to Maria Elena on her own behalf and/or as agent for and/or on behalf of any company that she would procure to execute the Share Distribution Agreements and/or the \ ` February SDAs \ ' -LRB- namely , Codan -LRB- as trustee -RRB- and/or Pembroke -LRB- as nominees -RRB- and/or Dressage and/or Tarland and/or FSL . -RRB-
Even if they could establish significant financial loss it might be difficult to enforce an English judgment against Alvaro in Ecuador .
5.4 As to -LRB- i -RRB- Mr Pollock relied on the decision of the High Court of Australia in Vadasz v. Pioneer Concrete -LRB- SA -RRB- Pty Ltd -LRB- 1995 -RRB- 184 CLR 102 where the court had declined to follow the decision of the Court of Appeal in TSB Bank Plc v. Camfield -LSB- 1995 -RSB- 1 WLR 430 .
In particular , it could not be inferred that if , following Mercedes \ 's agreement to leave the company in January 1997 , Maria Elena and Isabel had told Alvaro that they declined to allow him to become a shareholder or to have any part in the management , he would not have preferred simply to leave things there and drop his claims in the Ecuador courts which , according to the claimants , were hopeless .
5.5.2 In the period between Mercedes \ 's agreement in principle to withdraw from FSL and Isabel \ 's decision to relinquish the great bulk of her shares the position was that if Alvaro had been content to accept a position of equality with his sisters , Maria Elena and Isabel , there would have had to be a share distribution agreement to give effect to that agreement .
5.5.4 The alleged misrepresentations by Alvaro which are said to have induced the 31st January agreement in principle and the February and April Share Distribution Agreements would , if made , have induced whatever distribution agreement had been made , even if Isabel had not sold her shares and the Brunswick Agreement had never been needed .
5.5.6 As to the alleged so-called `` escrow '' instructions from Alvaro to Mr Cephas not to release the Master Agreement for signature by Mercedes until the share distribution agreement had been executed , that could not be an effective escrow instruction because it was unilateral to Alvaro and not known to Maria Elena or Isabel or Mercedes .
Alvaro would lose his 25.1 per cent , but , as that had been acquired at par , it was effectively `` a gift '' obtained by fraud and all that he had given up was a valueless claim against Mercedes in respect of his father \ 's estate .
5.7 The argument advanced by the claimants that Dressage and therefore Maria Elena had affirmed the Share Distribution Agreements was to be rejected because , at the time of the commencement of the proceedings in the Bahamas against FSL , Maria Elena had by the commencement of the New York proceedings already rescinded the agreements and her conduct or that of Dressage by which she was bound could not operate as an affirmation of already terminated agreements .
Alternatively , FSL must have known that the claimants were not affirming because of the on-going proceedings in New York and the litigation in the Bahamas was therefore not an unequivocal indication of affirmation .
This has been recognised as well-established since the eighteenth century : see Myddleton v. Lord Kenyon -LRB- 1794 -RRB- 2 Ves 391 at 408 , per Lord Eldon : `` The deed may be set aside in toto ... .
The House of Lords has affirmed this position in United Share Machinery Co v. Brunet -LSB- 1909 -RSB- AC 330 where Lord Atkinson observed that the defrauded party could not avoid one part of a contract and affirm another part `` unless indeed the parts are so severable from each other as to form two separate contracts '' .
founded his conclusion on Lord Browne - Wilkinson \ 's speech in Barclays Bank Plc v. O \ ` Brien -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 AC 180 at page 199 : `` It seems to me that setting aside must refer to setting aside in its entirety .
In the earlier case of Thorpe v. Fasey -LSB- 1949 -RSB- 1 Ch 649 Wynn-Parry J. referred to the judgment of the Divisional Court in Sheffield Nickel & Silver Plating Co Ltd v. Charwin -LRB- 1877 -RRB- 2 QBD 214 per Lush J : \ t `` A contract voidable for fraud can not be avoided when the other party can not be restored to his status quo : Clarke v. Dickson .
Thus there are numerous cases where rescission has involved the return of property by the representee which has substantially diminished in value through no fault of the representee : eg Armstrong v. Jackson -LSB- 1917 -RSB- 2 KB 822 .
This is clearly reflected in the speech of Lord Wright in Spence v. Crawford -LSB- 1939 -RSB- 3 Al ER 271 at pages 288 to 289 : `` The remedy is equitable .
In support of this argument Mr Pollock relies on the decision of the High Court of Australia in Vadasz v. Pioneer Concrete -LRB- SA -RRB- Pty Ltd -LRB- 1995 -RRB- 184 CLR 182 .
It held on the basis of the speech of Lord Blackburn in Erlanger v. New Sombrero Phosphate Co -LRB- 1878 -RRB- 3 App Case 1218 and the observations of Lord Wright in Spence v. Crawford , supra , which I have already cited , that the guarantor \ 's liability was limited to future indebtedness .
It observed that a similar approach had been taken in a number of cases , including in the footnote Barclays Bank v. O \ ` Brien -LSB- 1993 -RSB- QB 109 in the Court of Appeal and noting that the appeal had been dismissed by the House of Lords , but apparently entirely overlooking the fact that such an approach was diametrically inconsistent with the passage from the speech of Lord Browne-Wilkinson which I have already cited as one of the bases for the conclusion of the Court of Appeal in TSB Bank v. Camfield .
6.6 In Far Eastern Shipping Co Public Ltd v. Scales Trading Ltd -LRB- 20.11.00 -RRB- , an unreported decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on an appeal from the Court of Appeal of New Zealand in respect of the enforceability of a guarantee induced by non-disclosure , one of the arguments advanced by the guaranteed supplier was that as held by the New Zealand Court of Appeal , on the basis of Vadasz , rescission of the guarantee should be permitted only if the guarantor paid the principal debt so far accrued before rescission .
Although Lord Scott described the issue whether Vadasz should be preferred to TSB Bank v. Camfield as `` an important one '' , there is nothing in the judgment to suggest that the Privy Council held any concluded or even provisional view on the matter .
Unless and until the House of Lords overrules the analysis by Lord Browne-Wilkinson in Barclays Bank v. O \ ` Brien and its particular application in TSB Bank v. Camfield , the principles binding on this court are well-settled .
That was obviously essential , otherwise FSL might not obtain from Mercedes and Isabel the shares to be redistributed to the transferees , including Alvaro .
Towards the end of that period discussions between Maria Elena , Isabel and Alvaro took place on the subject of the extent of his participation in control and ownership of FSL .
The 30th January agreement signed by Alvaro , Maria Elena and Isabel covered both compensation to Isabel and at least some of the `` related transactions '' in the Brunswick Agreement , but it is difficult to relate all the Brunswick Agreement provisions to the contents of the 30th January document signed by the siblings .
There remained to be agreed how the shares to be sold back to FSL by Mercedes and Isabel were to be distributed .
It appears that at the 31st January meeting Maria Elena and Isabel put forward a distribution agreeable to them which by 4th February at the latest Alvaro was prepared to accept .
Had there been no redistribution of the FSL shares bought in from Mercedes and Isabel , he would have derived no tangible benefit in terms of ownership or control of FSL notwithstanding that he had contributed to the consideration for Mercedes \ 's shares by giving up his claims against the estate .
Hence it is arguable that Harrington as successor to Codan as trustee of the Hanover Trust and Dressage Trust could rely on the alleged misrepresentations to Maria Elena as a basis for rescinding the Maria Elena SDA .
8.2 However , the trustee of the Hanover and Dressage Trusts was not a party to the Diana or Isabel Share Distribution Agreements .
8.3 The argument advanced on behalf of the defendants that Dressage had affirmed the Share Distribution Agreements by its application to the court in the Bahamas for disclosure of FSL \ 's internal corporate documents encounters two distinct questions : \ x13PRIVATE \ x15 \ t -LRB- a -RRB- whether the commencement by Maria Elena and Isabel on 3rd November 1997 of the proceedings for rescission in New York operated as a rescission of all three Share Distribution Agreements which rendered subsequent conduct by Dressage incapable of amounting to affirmation ; \ t -LRB- b -RRB- whether , if the answer to -LRB- a -RRB- is No , Dressage \ 's conduct amounted to an unequivocal election to affirm .
Yet it is at least arguable that it must have been obvious to FSL -LRB- then under Alvaro \ 's control -RRB- that , alongside the pending proceedings in New York , Dressage , Maria Elena \ 's vehicle , could not be representing by the application for documents that she abandoned or , through her , it abandoned the rescission of the Share Distribution Agreements .
Accordingly , the applications by Alvaro , Earth and Water under CPR 3.4.2 and CPR 24.2 and that by FSL to set aside service on it outside the jurisdiction must be dismissed .
After the New York court had stayed those proceedings on condition that Alvaro agreed to proceedings in the Commercial Court in accordance with clause 15 - the Governing Law and Jurisdiction clause - the claimants \ ' solicitors by a letter of 15th November 1999 asked Ince & Co whether they were in a position to accept service on behalf of FSL .
As Harrington is described as `` successor '' to Codan as trustee of the Hanover Trust , it is probable that it too effectively served process .
Any Dispute arising under or in connection with this Guarantee shall be referred to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts and we irrevocably appoint Watson , Farley & Williams of 15 Appold Street , London EC2A 2HB , -LRB- reference JS -RRB- to accept service of any legal proceedings issued against us by you or your assignees in the English Courts .
On 30 June 2000 Lloyds Bank who appeared to have no response from the Banks wrote to the Banks in the following terms : \ n \ xc2 \ x931 .
Towards the end of the hearing of the application during which a partner in Norton Rose , solicitors to Lloyds Bank , had been present , the Buyers produced to the Court a letter from Norton Rose written during the course of the hearing which stated : \ n \ xc2 \ x93We understand that questions have been raised in Court this morning as to why we declined to respond substantively to a letter from -LSB- the solicitors to the Spanish Banks -RSB- dated 25 January 2001 .
\ n The refund guarantee contained its own dispute resolution mechanism ; there was nothing that pointed to payment being dependent on an award under the shipbuilding contract ; the general principle was that a guarantor was not bound by an award made under the contract which he guaranteed : see the judgment of Robert Goff J in The Vasso -LSB- 1979 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 412 at 418 .
Contractors v Lloyds Bank -LSB- 1990 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 496 , where the Court of Appeal was considering a performance bond , Staughton LJ observed at 500 that : \ n \ xc2 \ x93 .
On 25 th April 1988 Utexafrica and three other companies , Usines Textiles Cotonni \ xc3 \ xa8res de Kinshasa S.Z.a.r.l. , Zaireprint S.Z.a.r.l and Otricot Super Star S.p.r.l. , entered into what is entitled an \ xc2 \ x91Investment Agreement \ xc2 \ x92 with the claimant , the International Finance Corporation -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93IFC \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- , for a loan of 11.5 million European Currency Units -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93Ecus \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- for the modernisation of a textile mill in Kinshasa .
\ n Closely linked to the Investment Agreement was a Foreign Exchange Retention Agreement -LRB- \ xc2 \ x93FERA \ xc2 \ x94 -RRB- dated 17 th October 1988 to which the borrowers , IFC and Texaf were all parties .
Under the FERA the borrowers and Texaf agreed to set up a retention account in a bank outside the Democratic Republic of Zaire -LRB- as it was then -RRB- into which the borrowers would pay all sums which they became entitled to receive from foreign buyers in respect of goods exported from Zaire .
In June 1990 the parties executed a formal amendment to the Investment Agreement by which the proper law was altered from the law of New York to the law of England , the parties agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of the High Court and provision was made for the service of proceedings on Utexafrica through agents in London .
Pursuant to that amendment Utexafrica nominated BNP Paribas in London as its agent to accept service of proceedings .
\ n The claim form in this action was issued on 15 th December 2000 and was served by post on the chief executive officer of BNP Paribas in London .
In these circumstances Mr. Howe on behalf of IFC did not suggest that there had been any failure on the part of Utexafrica to act promptly .
Mr. Howe drew my attention to the commentary in paragraph 13.3.1 of Civil Procedure and to the decision of the Court of Appeal in The Saudi Eagle -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep. 221 in which the court held that in order to set aside a default judgment under O. 13 of the Rules of the Supreme Court a defendant had to show that he had a realistic prospect of defeating the claim .
\ n Mr. Popplewell \ xc2 \ x92s primary submission was that following the upsurge of civil unrest in Zaire -LRB- now the Democratic Republic of Congo -RRB- in 1991 IFC had assured Utexafrica that it would not exercise its rights under the Investment Agreement until conditions of economic stability had returned and that Utexafrica had thereafter conducted its affairs on that basis so as to make it inequitable for IFC to bring the present action .
In March 1993 Mr. Hafez met representatives of Texaf in Brussels to discuss Utexafrica \ xc2 \ x92s position .
\ n The meeting on 10 th March 1993 was attended by Mr. Hafez on behalf of IFC and by Mr. de l \ xc2 \ x92Arbre , Mr. Croonenberghs and Mr. Colleye of Texaf on behalf of both Texaf and Utexafrica .
UTEXAFRICA The representatives in Zaire from the World Bank have sent a memo to Washington in which they report that Utexafrica was abandoning its factory and repatriating its staff Formal denial by TEXAF .
As regards the World Bank , cultivate the idea of aid through private representative companies and with whom Washington maintains relations : medical care in particular .
Mr. Hafez will support these requests to Washington .
Mr. Hafez , whom the Kinshasa \ xc2 \ x92s Department of the World Bank had told that Utexafrica had snuffed it , appreciated our financial and physical determination to preserve the plant .
He submitted that , taken together with the evidence of Mr. Croonenberghs and Mr. Froissard , it provided sufficient evidence for the purposes of this application of a representation by Mr. Hafez that IFC would not enforce its legal rights under the Investment Agreement until economic stability had returned to the Congo .
In his second witness statement responding to the evidence filed on behalf of IFC he says \ n \ xc2 \ x93it was not only at the meeting that Mr. Hafez confirmed that IFC would not be taking any action to pursue repayment of the loan .
\ xc2 \ x94 Mr. Froissard , the managing director of Utexafrica \ xc2 \ x92s factory between 1991 and 1999 , says in his witness statement \ xc2 \ x93Throughout these times -LSB- Mr. Hafez -RSB- repeatedly assured me that Utexafrica had his complete support -LSB- and -RSB- that no action , aggressive or not , would be taken by IFC with regards to its loan until the country had stabilised .
\ xc2 \ x94 Mr. Hafez says that he gave no assurance of the kind suggested by Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Croonenberghs and Mr. Froissard and the summary of the meeting which he produced for IFC contains nothing corresponding to the passage in Texaf \ xc2 \ x92s note on which Mr. Popplewell laid such emphasis .
However , the matter does not rest there because the subsequent communications between IFC , Texaf and Utexafrica have been put in evidence and themselves shed further light on what was said at the meeting and how it was understood by Utexafrica .
\ n On 9 th July 1993 Mr. Pasquier , Mr. Hafez \ xc2 \ x92s superior , wrote to Texaf in response to a request from Utexafrica for the release of funds held in the retention account .
The note of the meting prepared by Texaf records that Mr. Hafez was insisting on a payment of US$ 100,000 for the sake of the principle , but also notes that there was a problem with the amount frozen in the retention account .
A meeting was held in Washington in June 1994 to put this proposal to IFC , but it came to nothing because IFC \ xc2 \ x92s own constitution prevented it from entering into agreements with governments .
There is no evidence in the documents of any further exchanges between the parties prior to a meeting in Washington between Mr. Pasquier , Mr. de l \ xc2 \ x92Arbre and others which occurred in September 1995 and is referred to in a letter from Mr. Froissard to Texaf dated 10th June 1996 .
In that letter Mr. Froissard refers to instructions he has given for the transfer to IFC of US$ 119,945 representing 10 % of the amounts repatriated to Zaire in respect of export sales .
It invited Utexafrica to produce a proposal meeting these criteria and in due course a proposal was brought forward which was presented to IFC at a meeting in Washington in October 1999 .
I do not find that surprising because in my view the remark which Mr. Hafez is recorded in the Texaf note as having made is capable in its context of bearing a variety of meanings .
Equally , the matters which Texaf asked him to pursue in Washington are of a very different order .
No doubt Utexafrica and Texaf did draw the conclusion that IFC would not in fact seek to enforce the agreement , but that is a very different thing from saying that they had received a clear undertaking from IFC not to do so .
In the face of this evidence , and notwithstanding what is said by Mr. Croonenberghs and Mr. Froissard , both of whom deal with the matter only in very general terms , I find it impossible to accept that Utexafrica has a realistic prospect of persuading the court that it or Texaf believed that they had received any such undertaking from Mr. Hafez or anyone else on behalf of IFC .
However , Mr. Howe had two answers to this point : first , he submitted that a part-payment had been made on 24 th February 1992 which had the effect under section 29 of the Act of starting time running again ; secondly , he submitted that there had been an acknowledgment of the debt in the form of accounts sent annually by Utexafrica to IFC in accordance with the terms of the Investment Agreement which had the same effect .
\ n I have no doubt that accounts of the kind represented by the financial statements which Utexafrica sent to IFC each year are capable of amounting to an acknowledgment for the purposes of section 29 -LRB- 5 -RRB- of the Limitation Act of the existence of debts shown in them as being owed to third parties : see Halsbury \ xc2 \ x92s Laws of England , vol .28 , \ xc2 \ xa71092 .
Mr. Howe submitted that the financial statements sent annually by Utexafrica to IFC in the present case contained an acknowledgement of the debt and sought permission to rely on additional evidence in support of this argument in the form of a series of such statements together with their covering letters delivered to IFC during the period of the loan .
\ n On 5 th April 2001 IFC served as an exhibit to the second witness statement of Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Douglas a bundle of copy documents in substantially the same form as that which Mr. Howe had sought to put before me during the course of the hearing .
MSS said that it was entitled to make the set off of sums due from a different Sinochem company to a different Mobil company by virtue of the set off clause in the London contract .
Those contracts were for the sale of low sulphur fuel oil -LRB- `` LSFO '' -RRB- to be shipped from California , USA .
\ t \ t -LRB- 7 -RRB- It was also alleged that there was a meeting at the Holiday Inn in Zongshan in June , 1998 between the Guo brothers and Mr Ye Cong on behalf of Guo \ 's Bros , and Mr Yang of Sinochem Singapore , and Mr Chan , Mr Johnson Ng and Mr Zing of MHK where it was agreed that Guo \ 's Bros would itself pay for the oil shipped under the HK contracts and it would do so by August 1998 .
\ r \ n \ tThe original pleading , stated that the sum was not , in fact , due from Sinochem , Singapore , as opposed to Guo \ 's Bros , and so was recoverable as being paid under a mistake of fact or law .
\ r \ n \ tIn a proposed amended pleading , Sinochem Beijing asserts that the payment made on 28th August , 1998 was also authorised by Mr Wang , who also showed the mistaken belief of Mr Ma that the sum was due to MHK from Sinochem Singapore rather than Guo \ 's Bros. \ r \ n \ tIn response to these pleas , MHK pleaded in reply that : \ r \ n \ t \ t -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThere was no oral agreement in February or March , 1998 as alleged .
In more detail on the first main point he submits : \ r \ n \ t \ t -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ tThat the evidence of Mr Ye Cong , the former financial officer of Guo \ 's Bros is credible , and demonstrates the following : \ t \ t \ t -LRB- a -RRB- \ tThat there had been previous contracts for a different type of oil called MIDW between MHK and Sinochem Beijing , or Sinochem Singapore where there would be two sets of contracts ; one between MHK and one of the Sinochem companies , and the other between , one or other of those companies and a Guo \ 's Bros related company in Singapore .
In order to reduce these deficits the plan was to enable Guo \ 's Bros to make a substantial profit on a particular shipment provided by Mobil from the USA that would enable Guo \ 's Bros to `` trade out of the problem and so reduce the account receivable , -LRB- Mr Ye witness statement para 14 -RRB- .
Mr Ye goes on to say that there were negotiations between the chairman of Guo \ 's Bros , -LRB- who has since disappeared -RRB- , and Mr Ng and Mr Chan of MHK .
The witness statement of Mr Ye goes on to say in paragraph 14 : `` As I recall it it was proposed that Guo \ 's would pay Mobil -LRB- directly -RRB- about 60 days after the arrival of the vessel and with the intention that we would have enough time to refine the product ... .
The faxes were sent to Mr Ng and Mr Chan of MHK and were frequently preceded by telephone conversations between Mr Ye or the Chairman and Mr Ng or Mr Chan .
Paragraph 17 of Mr Ye \ 's witness statement continues : `` On this occasion Mobil would prepare contracts in favour of Sinochem Beijing .
Mr Ye goes on to say : `` Sinochem Beijing were not to be responsible to Mobil for the payment '' , but he was fairly sure that no one in Sinochem Beijing was aware of the true nature of the arrangements of the shipment , and the proposed transaction because it was negotiated directly between Guo \ 's Bros and Mobil .
\ t \ t \ t -LRB- a -RRB- \ tFirst there is the hearsay statement in Mr Blow \ 's witness statement that he was told by his partner at Holman Fenwick & Willan in Singapore , Mr Davidson , that Mr Yang , the Chairman of Guo , had informed Mr Davidson in December , 1998 that the arrangement was that Guo \ 's Bros would make payment for the shipment directly to Mobil .
He says that he was called by Mr Yang of Guo \ 's Bros in February/March , 1998 and asked if Sinochem Beijing would be interested in a deal whereby a sale would be made by Mobil to Sinochem Beijing and then from Sinochem Beijing to Guo \ 's Bros .
The evidence of Mr Ye , that an agreement was made at the Holiday Inn meeting that Sinochem Singapore would agree to take an extra 77,000 metric tonnes and back date the contract , on terms that only Guo \ 's Bros would be liable for the price , is inconsistent with shipping documentation of May , 1998 that the cargo had been sold to Sinochem Singapore .
Furthermore there was a back to back agreement between Sinochem Singapore and Guo \ 's Bros for the sale to the latter of 87,000 metric tonnes , as evidenced by Jenny Ng \ 's statement .
He submits that the witness evidence of Mr Ma and Mr Ye on the Holiday Inn meeting can not be dismissed as being incredible .
First of all for the rationale for the oral agreement , set out in paragraph 14 of his witness statement , is said to be that Guo \ 's Bros owed Sinochem , Singapore , some $ 40 million , and Sinochem Singapore owed the same amount approximately to MHK as at February 1998 .
\ r \ n \ tThe evidence of Mr Ye that the final decision on behalf of MHK was made by Mr Stephen Chow , or Zhou -LSB- paragraph 18 -RSB- is denied by Mr Barry Li of MHK in his statement -LSB- paragraph 11 -RSB- , where he says that he has talked to Mr Chow , who denies any meeting with the chairman of Guo \ 's Bros .
The vessel was on a voyage from Abidjan to Europe laden with a cargo of containers .
She had been built in France in 1977 and then `` jumboised '' in Korea in 1986 .
She was then chartered for voyages between Europe and South Africa via West Africa .
\ r \ n The vessel left Piraeus on 24 December 1993 and proceeded to La Spezia as her first loadport .
When the vessel left Piraeus her stabiliser tanks were full but they were pumped out before the vessel got to La Spezia and were reported to be dry .
On leaving Barcelona on 31 December 1993 , the vessel sailed for Abidjan , arriving there on 9 January 1994 .
The Defendants relied on a statement of Captain Artemios Dracoutos , the Master of the '' Seaford '' -LRB- made in the Salvage Arbitration proceedings -RRB- that Captain Dimitrious Vassiliou of the `` Vergina '' had told him that the vessel had a stability problem and had sailed from Abidjan with a 6 \ xc2 \ xb0 to 8 \ xc2 \ xb0 list to starboard .
The Defendants also relied upon evidence of the replacement Chief Engineer Ntokouzis that there was an 8 \ xc2 \ xb0 list to port after dropping the pilot on leaving Abidjan and also evidence of the Radio Officer and the Cook concerning a list on leaving Abidjan .
-LSB- 68 -RSB- In the second case relied on , Mountain v Whittle , -LSB- 69 -RSB- the House of Lords upheld the concurrent findings of fact of the trial judge and the Court of Appeal .
\ r \ n \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 4 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Of Marine Consulting Ltd \ r \ n \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 5 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Of Brookes , Bell , Jarrett , Kirman .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 64 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0The Defendants rely upon ED Sassoon v Western Assurance Company -LSB- 1912 -RSB- AC 561 at 563 per Lord Mersey ; Mountain v Whittle -LSB- 1921 -RSB- 1 AC 615 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 65 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0Levy Report para 8.3 : Bundle L/page 22 .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 66 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- 1912 -RSB- AC 561 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 67 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0This was an appeal from His Britannic Majesty \ xc2 \ x92s Supreme Court for China at Shanghai .
\ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 69 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- 1921 -RSB- 1 AC 615 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 -LSB- Back -RSB- Note 70 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0 \ xc2 \ xa0See particularly the reasoning of viscount Sumner at page 630 .
\ tCeleb Brett were the appointed independent inspectors at Antwerp and were instructed to carry out the determination under clause 10 .
Mr Nolan says that the test they used was the one which was customary at the Antwerp loading installation .
In some cases , such as the unreported decision of mine in Conoco v Phillips , the expert is entitled to choose a method or procedure and the parties will normally be bound by his choice .
\ t \ tThe word ` material \ ' as used by Dillon LJ in Jones v Sherwood -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 1 WLR 277 at page 287 -LRB- `` if the mistake made was that the expert departed from his instructions in a material respect '' -RRB- is capable of meaning either that the mistake must be more than trivial or that the mistake must have made a material difference to the result .
The vessel was originally classed with American Bureau of Shipping -LRB- `` ABS '' -RRB- , but was transferred to Bureau Veritas -LRB- `` BV '' -RRB- in about September 1989 .
\ r \ n At about 0640 hours on 7 March 1990 the `` Lendoudis Evangelos II '' departed from Montreal carrying a part cargo of wheat destined for Bangladesh .
\ r \ n Expert evidence as to fuel tank emergency shut-off systems Mr. Alan Carney of Gordon Giles & Company Ltd -LRB- called by the claimants -RRB- and Mr. Brian Boorman of Burness , Corlett & Partners -LRB- London -RRB- Ltd -LRB- called by the defendants -RRB- helpfully provided a memorandum on the subject of fuel tank emergency shut-off systems .
\ r \ n The vessel sank off Lae in Papua New Guinea -LRB- `` PNG '' -RRB- having been abandoned by the crew of three in circumstances where sinking appeared to be inevitable because the after compartments were filling with water at a rate faster than the bilge pumps in the lazarette could contain .
Mr John Passmore , on behalf of the defendant underwriters , relies in support of this proposition on the decision of the House of Lords in The POPI M -LSB- 1985 -RSB- 1 WLR 948 and that of the Court of the Appeal in The MAREL -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 624 .
The very illuminating analysis of the substance of this peril by Mustill J. in The `` Miss Jay Jay '' -LSB- 1985 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 264 at page 271 , upheld on appeal at -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ ' Rep 32 , clearly shows that there will not be a loss by perils of the seas where the vessel \ 's condition is so weak that , not only can it not withstand adverse weather , but it can not withstand even perfect weather because it suffers from `` debility '' : see Wandsworth Lighterage and Coaling Co v. Sea Insurance Co -LRB- 1929 -RRB- 34 LLR 98 at 105 .
\ r \ n Since the decision of the House of Lords in The POPI M , supra , and the subsequent decision of the Court of Appeal in The MAREL -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 LR 624 have been strongly relied upon by Mr John Passmore on behalf of the defendants , it is necessary to examine these propositions in the light of those two cases .
\ r \ n The House of Lords rejected the process of reasoning which Bingham J. used to conclude , by eliminating deterioration of the hull as a possible cause , that it was more likely than not that the rupture of the hull was caused by collision with a submarine .
Lord Brandon , with whom all other members of the House agreed , construed the judgment as having overlooked the alternative possible conclusion that it was impossible to infer on the evidence that the uneliminated explanation for the rupture of the hull could not be said on the balance of probabilities to be the true explanation for the loss : see pages 955-956 .
In this connection I agree with the observations of Toulson J. in The S/Y Delphine -LRB- Unrep 30.4.01 -RRB- at para 20 of his judgment that Lord Brandon \ 's remarks as to the need for the assured to `` condescend to particulars '' was to be understood in the context of the unusual facts in The POPI M .
In my judgment , nothing in the speech of Lord Brandon in The POPI M has disturbed the well-established approach to unexplained losses exemplified by Anderson v. Morice -LRB- 1874 -RRB- LR 10 CP 58 and Ajum Goolam Hossen & Co v. Union Marine Insurance Co Ltd -LSB- 1901 -RSB- Ac 362 , both of which cases were cited in the Popi M .
\ r \ n The vessel was purchased by Mr Cunningham in Singapore in March 1998 .
\ r \ n The owning company at the time of the loss was registered in the British Virgin Islands because it was ascertained by Mr Cunningham that it would be easier to deal with the authorities in PNG and Australia than if the owning company was a Hong Kong company as it had formerly been .
\ r \ n At the time of the loss Mr Cunningham was in Brisbane .
Both his son , Mark , and his son in law , Henry Munro , were experienced owners of motor yachts .
A letter from the owners dated 14th September 1999 to the adjusters , Richards Insurance Services , explained that this was to be `` a day out provided by Mr Cunningham , free of charge , for the directors and senior management of Mobil , who are substantial clients of Mr Cunningham '' .
Immediately following the loss Judith Munro , Mr Cunningham \ 's daughter , and Mark Cunningham , his son , prepared short reports on the loss .
\ r \ n There was some evidence that there were floating logs in the area which had been carried down the Markham River to Lae .
Having referred to reports that on the day after the loss Mark Cunningham and the master had returned in the dinghy to the site of the sinking `` looking for logs '' , he observed that this might be seen as some confirmation that logs might have been more prevalent than usual and continued : \ r \ n `` Had this trip been specifically to search for logs , or had logs been found , or had the trip had any significance with respect to the cause of the loss then it would surely have featured in the master \ 's statement or been raised by the Cunningham family .
By that contract , \ tthe Claimants , the Tug Owners , agreed to hire their tug , Janus , to the Defendants for a \ t6 month charter in the Kiel Canal , Germany .
\ r \ n \ tThe Defendants say that Ms Konig does not recall receiving any official documents in a foreign language ; that had such been received she would have passed them to Mr Mobius , who does not recollect seeing them , and a search of the Defendants \ ' premises have not revealed them .
\ r \ n \ tThe Prepayment Agreement provided by clause 5.3 : \ r \ n `` This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of England and any dispute or matter arising directly or indirectly under or relating to this Agreement shall be submitted to arbitration in London under the Arbitration Acts .
They called on those parties to join with them in appointing an arbitrator within 28 days failing which they would apply to the High Court in London under section 16 of the Arbitration Act for such appointment to be made .
The proceedings were served on Kalmneft but by their letter of 24 April 2000 Kalmneft stated that the Arbitration Court of Kalmykia had already held that the agreement was invalid on the ground that the arbitration agreement contained `` numerous flaws '' , that Briarwise had ceased to be registered in Ireland , that criminal proceedings had been commenced against Daginov by the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kalmykia and that the arbitration proceedings in London should be terminated because the Kalmykia State Court had already ruled on the validity of the agreement and no award of a foreign tribunal would be recognised or enforced .
\ tOn 30 September 2000 Baker & McKenzie -LRB- `` B&M '' -RRB- submitted Glencore \ 's Statement of Case as to its substantive claim .
Messrs Peter Levine of Leeds then made contact with the arbitrator .
It seems to have been assumed that it would be better to present its own case on the issue as to jurisdiction , starting from the basis that there was no jurisdiction because the Prepayment Agreement had been entered into by Daginov without authority and that the Russian courts had or would ultimately reach this conclusion and that any award from England would be unenforceable in Kalmykia .
\ xc2 \ x94 The delivery of the cargo A cargo of 28,600 mt of Low Sulphur fuel oil was loaded at Tarragona , Spain on the Adriatiki on 15 November 2000 by Repsol SA .
The Buyers transported that quantity in December 2000 to Augusta , Sicily on the Cap Farina and then by road to Messina ; the Buyers claimed they had difficulty in transporting the oil because of the pour point ; they had intended to ship it directly to Messina , but because of the pour point , that could not be done as the shore line was long and it had to be discharged at Augusta and sent on by road .
\ n The ship \ xc2 \ x92s composite sample taken by Saybolt in November 2000 -LRB- sample A -RRB- was then re-tested by Saybolt on 25 April 2001 in the presence of the Buyers and Sellers in two ways ; test -LRB- 1 -RRB- involved the original sample A prepared on 18 November 2000 and test -LRB- 2 -RRB- involved a new sample prepared on 25 April 2001 from the ship \ xc2 \ x92s tanks representing the cargo discharged at Malta ; the following results for -LRB- 1 -RRB- and -LRB- 2 -RRB- were set out in a certificate dated 26 April 2001 : \ n TEST \ tUNIT \ tMETHOD \ t \ tRESULTS \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t1 \ t2 \ xc2 \ x93Pour Point \ t \ tC \ tASTM D97 \ t \ t +6 \ t +12 Two further tests were also carried out : \ n On 11 January 2001 Saybolt analysed a sample from shoretank 323 in Malta ; this contained the remainder of the cargo .
They were not - the Saybolt test as certified on 22 November 2000 for the whole cargo at Malta -LRB- sample C -RRB- was +9 \ xc2 \ xb0C ; this was outside the reproducibility range applicable in respect of the Tarragona test and the repeatability range for the other tests at Malta .
\ t \ t -LRB- b -RRB- \ tThat there should not be such a large difference between Tarragona and Malta ; it should not have exceeded the reproducibility range .
A fourth company , Texaco International Trader Inc. -LRB- `` Texaco '' -RRB- , entered into an agreement with Metro Oil Corporation -LRB- `` MOC '' -RRB- , an associated company of MTI which operated a refinery and oil storage facilities in Fujairah , for the processing of crude oil .
At the pre-trial review , therefore , I directed that at the first trial under Phase 2 the court would only deal with issues relating to the relationship between Glencore and MTI and that the relationship between MTI and Caltex , Mobil , Arexco and Texaco would be the subject of a second trial currently fixed for hearing later this year .
The precise nature of their relationship changed significantly in June 1996 when the parties moved from JV1 to JV2 , but from about the end of 1994 one constant feature of the relationship was the delivery by Glencore into MTI \ 's floating storage facility at Fujairah of substantial quantities of oil for subsequent sale , often in the form of blended products , into both the local bunker market and the fuel oil market in the Indian sub-continent and the Far East , especially Singapore .
In the spring of 1992 Glencore had obtained a contract to supply fuel oil to Pakistan which it intended to fulfil with fuel oil purchased from a refinery in Bahrain .
The terms of that contract were set out in a telex message from Glencore to MTI dated 19 th August 1993 which was copied to Mr. Griffin in the United States .
On 11 th \ xc2 \ xa0April Mr. Griffin reported the transaction to MTI \ 's Athens office and asked for the letter of credit to be opened as soon as possible in order to facilitate the release of a further parcel of oil .
\ r \ n I have little doubt that as their relationship developed , and particularly as Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Kilakos , and Mr. Hawkins and Mrs. Gene , became better acquainted , the degree of trust between Glencore and MTI grew .
This form of contract is entirely consistent with the understanding of Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Griffin -LRB- and also of Mrs. Gene -RRB- that at this stage Glencore intended to deal with MTI on secured terms subject to any specific agreement to the contrary .
In about January 1994 Mr. Hawkins began keeping two sets of records : an inventory of the various products held by MTI in storage for Glencore and a financial record headed \ ` Value of Cargoes FO stored aboard MT Mount Athos and Metrotank bought/sold by Marc Rich -LSB- Glencore -RSB- \ ' .
At one of the early meetings held in London , probably in June 1994 , Mr. Griffin gave Mr. Hawkins a computer disk containing a copy of the spreadsheet which he himself was using to record movements of oil brought to Fujairah under the parties \ ' joint venture arrangements .
There is surprisingly little evidence about the explanation or instructions which Mr. Griffin gave Mr. Hawkins about the use of the spreadsheet .
For the purposes of their record keeping and administration Mr. Hawkins and Mr. Griffin treated all this business as having been conducted under the same arrangements as those which had applied to the original cargoes stored on the Mount Athos .
\ r \ n One other matter needs to be mentioned at this point , namely , that throughout 1994 MTI was active as a supplier of bunkers in Fujairah , both to the local market and in the market for cargoes to the Far East , notably Singapore .
Mr. Griffin \ 's recollection was that these two cargoes on the Jaguar were the first cargoes purchased specifically for that purpose .
Mr. Crane put it to Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 in cross-examination that it had been agreed between himself , Mr. Kilakos and Mr. Griffin shortly before the purchase of the first of the two Jaguar cargoes that MTI should sell the cargo as bunkers and account to the joint venture in arrears .
It was the evidence of both Mr. Kilakos and Mrs. Gene that the new arrangement under which -LRB- as he said -RRB- MTI were authorised to sell bunkers drawn from joint venture stock and account for them in arrears had been introduced in about February 1995 following discussions he had with Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and others from Glencore at the time of the International Petroleum Conference in London .
\ r \ n Since the products referred to in this message include 180cst and 280cst as well as 380cst fuel oil , any agreement of the kind suggested by Mr. Griffin would have had to have extended beyond the cargo on the Jaguar to include cargoes previously brought into Fujairah .
\ r \ n The fact that by the latter part of 1994 MTI was holding all fuel oil at Fujairah in commingled storage segregated only by grade means that any inventory of the kind kept by Mr. Hawkins is essentially in the nature of an accounting document .
On about 25 th April , by which time the vessel was only one day out of Singapore , it was agreed that the joint venture should participate in the contracts to the extent of 50 % and Mr. Hawkins recorded in his spreadsheet an in-tank transfer by the joint venture to MTI of 62,361.980 tons of oil -LRB- half the total cargo -RRB- on 15 th April .
Mr. Crane drew attention to eleven such transactions , six involving the vessel Aitolikos , four involving the vessel Fay and one involving the vessel Honam Saphire .
Mr. Crane made a number of criticisms of the way in which Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Hawkins had dealt with these shipments on the Honam Saphire .
It is fair to say that both Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Hawkins displayed to differing degrees a tendency to argue Glencore \ 's case as they saw it , but the same criticism can be made of Mr. Kilakos and Mrs. Gene .
In each case Mr. Hawkins entered the adjustments in his spreadsheet on or shortly after receiving the telex advice from Mrs. Gene , but entered the individual in-tank transfers on their respective ITT dates .
Mr. Hawkins insisted that MTI was not entitled to take any stock for blending unless and until a stock transfer certificate had been issued in respect of it and that he would have protested to Mrs. Gene if he had thought that MTI was not observing that requirement .
\ r \ n The manner in which Mr. Hawkins recorded the individual transfers in his spreadsheet by reference to their ITT dates is consistent with his general practice , but the entry of the blended parcel as an addition to stock on the date when he received the advice from Mrs. Gene is only consistent with his treating the whole of the blended parcel as having been produced by that time .
Blending generally took place a few days after the last of the relevant in-tank transfers had been agreed and Mrs. Gene informed Mr. Hawkins of the components used a few days later after receiving that information from the master of the Metrotank .
Thus on 3 rd March 1996 and again in July 1996 Mrs. Gene informed Mr. Hawkins of blends made to correct the inventory .
The telex sent by Mrs. Gene to Mr. Hawkins on 19 th July referred to `` Quantities/grades used for blending 380cst on 19/7/96 '' .
Margaritis from MTI \ 's Athens office to Glencore confirming the discharge of cargoes which had not in fact been discharged in whole or in part at Fujairah but had remained on board the vessel and had been carried on to another destination .
Margaritis worked in the Athens office under the general direction of Mrs. Gene .
\ r \ n Mr. Cooke also relied on a file note apparently produced by Glencore \ 's insurance brokers , Lloyd Thompson , recording a meeting with Mr. Warren and Mr. Gibson of Glencore \ 's insurance department in May 1997 relating to the renewal of its cover on oil held in the floating storage .
\ r \ n Mr. Cooke submitted that whether or not this note is authentic in the sense that it records discussions between Glencore and Lloyd Thompson on 27 th May 1997 , there is no reason to doubt that it reflects the understanding of Glencore \ 's insurance department of the manner in which operations were being carried out at Fujairah , an understanding that can only have been obtained from Mr. Hawkins .
Mr. Hawkins accepted that he was approached by the insurance department from time to time for information , but he denied telling Mr. Warren that most cargoes were blended and off-loaded within 30 days .
In addition to these there was the computerised spreadsheet originally introduced by Mr. Griffin and subsequently maintained by Mrs. Gene .
There was also frequent communication between Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Hawkins and Mrs. Gene who between them handled the bulk of the administration of the joint venture business and also between Mr. Hawkins and Capt .
The deal ticket was purely an internal document and was used by Mr. Hawkins as the basis for drafting the ITT contract confirming the sale which he sent to Mrs. Gene by telex a few days later .
\ r \ n The principal documents which passed between the parties relating to the administration of the joint venture were the spreadsheets kept by Mr. Hawkins and Mrs. Gene .
By the early part of 1995 it had become the established practice of Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Hawkins , Mr. Griffin and Mrs. Gene to send each other from time to time copies of the sheets covering recent transactions to enable them to reconcile any differences .
\ r \ n The exchange of documents on which Mr. Cooke relied took place mainly , though not entirely , between Mr. Hawkins on the one hand and Mr. Griffin and Mrs. Gene on the other .
He was aware too that Mrs. Gene and Mr. Hawkins were reconciling their positions by exchanging inventories from time to time and is likely to have appreciated from that fact alone that Glencore was keeping its inventory in the same way .
\ r \ n Mr. Crane submitted that in the course of their discussions in Singapore Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Kilakos had made it clear to Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 in one way or another that if there were to be a new arrangement under which MTI purchased all the oil brought into Fujairah it would need to assume complete control over that oil from the moment of its arrival .
He also submitted that substantial quantities of 380cst fuel oil were drawn from the joint venture stocks to enable MOC to meet its obligations under a processing agreement with Texaco .
Mrs. Gene said that she had learned of the existence of the new arrangements only at the end of July , and that in my view further reinforces the conclusion that Mr. Kilakos did not understand that the agreement reached with Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 in Singapore had the far-reaching effect he suggested .
Broadly speaking , Mr. Hawkins processed the cargoes in the order in which they arrived at Fujairah .
In particular , Mr. Hawkins and Mrs. Gene no longer exchanged inventories and the reconciliation procedure became largely routine .
Mr. Crane submitted that Mr. Hawkins \ ' explanation that part of the delay was due to an oversight on his part did not ring true and tended to support Mr. Kilakos \ ' evidence that there had been an agreement with Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 of the kind he described .
The cargoes in question were shipped out of Fujairah on the vessels Shibumi , Shoko , Erissos , Knock Buie , Addax and Amyndas .
The cargo was not discharged at Fujairah and Mr. Hawkins noted that fact in his JV2 spreadsheet .
\ r \ n -LRB- ii -RRB- Shoko -LRB- b/l 30.1.97 -RRB- On 14 th January 1997 Glencore agreed to buy from MTI 250,000-300 ,000 barrels of LRM and 3,000-6 ,000 tons of Kangan condensate f.o.b .
\ r \ n -LRB- iii -RRB- Knock Buie -LRB- b/l 7.2.97 -RRB- In January 1997 Glencore agreed to buy 53,585 tons of LRM from Saudi Aramco as prime supplier .
On 18 th February Mr. Hawkins instructed MTI to tranship 26,000 tons of the cargo from the Cherry to the Knock Buie on arrival at Fujairah rather than discharge it into store .
In the event the Knock Buie was late reaching Fujairah and the instructions were changed to allow discharge into the Stresa to await the arrival of the Knock Buie .
\ r \ n Despite the fact that half of it had been transhipped onto the Knock Buie , Capt. \ xc2 \ xa0Margaritis , who was responsible for operational matters in MTI \ 's Athens office , sent Glencore a telex stating that the whole of the Cherry \ 's cargo had been discharged into storage , and indeed the parties treated that as being the case .
On 28 th \ xc2 \ xa0January , as recorded in his deal ticket of that date , Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 agreed with Mr. Kilakos to buy 40-45 ,000 tons of LRM to be transhipped onto the vessel Amyndas from the Addax at Fujairah .
\ r \ n The effect of storage in common bulk Having reached certain conclusions as to the parties \ ' intentions with regard to the storage and handling of cargoes it is possible to consider Mr. Crane \ 's submission that the effect of the joint venture agreements was to entitle MTI to dispose of oil held at Fujairah as from the moment at which it was discharged into storage .
\ r \ n Mr. Crane submitted that , both under the law of Fujairah and under the law of England , where goods of a similar kind are commingled in store the owners of the contributing parcels become owners in common only of the physical bulk to which their goods have contributed .
\ r \ n Mr. Crane submitted , however , that that is not sufficient to determine Glencore \ 's proprietary interest in the bulk where other depositors have also contributed to it , possibly on different terms and he drew my attention to the position papers served by Caltex , Mobil and Arexco in this case , each of which expressly or by implication asserts that MTI was not entitled to commingle oil held for it in store with oil owned by MTI itself or third parties .
When Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Kilakos met Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 in Athens on 7 th \ xc2 \ xa0January he admitted that MTI had suffered financially , but said that it could weather the storm , and Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 received similar reassurances from Mr. Griffin .
\ r \ n On 30 th January Mr. Kilakos and Mrs. Gene went to Paris to see MTI \ 's main bankers , Banque Trad-Cr \ xc3 \ xa9dit Lyonnais -LRB- `` BTCL '' -RRB- .
\ r \ n At the beginning of the following week both Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Palacios travelled to Paris .
Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 left Paris for Tehran during the afternoon of 3 rd \ xc2 \ xa0February .
He returned to London on Friday 6 th February via Frankfurt .
The fact that as early as 3 rd February Glencore thought that it might be desirable to send someone out to Fujairah to report on the inventory does , as Mr. Crane submitted , sit uneasily with Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 \ 's evidence that he did not at that stage think that there was a physical loss , but in fact Mr. Garrett who was chosen for the job did not leave for Fujairah until 8 th \ xc2 \ xa0February , almost a week later .
\ r \ n In the evening of 5 th February Mr. Silverberg travelled to Israel leaving Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Dreyfus in charge of the situation in London .
Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 did not return to London from Tehran until the morning of Friday 6 th February .
\ r \ n The meeting of 7 th February The meeting which took place in MTI \ 's offices in Athens on 7 th February was attended by Mr. Silverberg , Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Palacios on behalf of Glencore and Mr. Kilakos and his son on behalf of MTI .
\ r \ n As applied by the House of Lords in Alghussein v Eton the rule takes the form of a presumption that the contract in question is not intended to be construed in a way which would allow one party to it to take advantage of his own breach .
In his final speech , therefore , Mr. Goldstone on behalf of the shipowners adopted the submissions made by Mr. Crane .
\ r \ n Mr. Goldstone submitted that Mr. Kilakos genuinely believed that under the JV2 arrangements MTI was entitled to deal with joint venture stock from the time of its arrival at Fujairah and that if there was any ambiguity in the arrangements made between him and Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 at Singapore in June 1996 it should be resolved against Glencore .
This submission was based on the authority of Ireland v Livingstone -LRB- 1872 -RRB- L.R .
\ r \ n Mr. Goldstone \ 's submission depends first of all on showing that the terms of the agreement between Mr. Heuz \ xc3 \ xa9 and Mr. Kilakos at Singapore were fairly capable of two interpretations .
\ r \ n Ireland v Livingstone is a rather unusual case .
\ r \ n On 9 th \ xc2 \ xa0February Mr. John Garrett arrived in Fujairah .
\ r \ n At about the same time as Mr. Garrett was sent out to Fujairah another of Glencore \ 's employees , Mrs Freeman , was sent to Athens to monitor operations in MTI \ 's office there .
It had been exhibited and passed into collections of collectors first in Paris and then in the USA .
\ tMr Jennings , who is now chairman of Sotheby \ 's Switzerland and deputy chairman of Sotheby \ 's Europe , had no actual recollection of the circumstances in which he signed the letter .
He would have taken into account prices that had recently been achieved in London and New York for Degas pastels , in particular : Sur La Scene , -LRB- c.l 879-1881 -RRB- sold at Christie \ 's New York in May 1989 at a \ nhammer price of $ 6m .
\ n \ tOn 1 October 1989 Mr Uppstrom sent Mr Brynildsen a copy of the letter from Mr Jennings of Christie \ 's ; he told him that the price they would have to pay was $ 4.3 m inclusive of all commissions .
Mayfair then took possession of it in New York at about the end of October 1989 .
He recalled that when the pastel was actually seen , he was of the opinion that Mr Jennings \ ' estimate was too high and Christie \ 's were not prepared to enter it for sale at the levels set out in the letter of 31 July 1989 .
\ tOn 23 October 1990 Mr Balfour-Oatts obtained a further valuation signed on behalf of Mr Jennings of Christie \ 's .
He used his contacts with other dealers including Mr Ralph Dosch \ tin Zurich and Mr Raimund Thomas in Munich ; this must have happened in 1990 ; Mr \ tDauberville , one of the Claimant \ 's experts was certainly told that Mr Uppstrom had contacted a large number of dealers .
At that time Mr Hook was \ tnot an expert in Impressionist art , but one of his partners , Mr David Bathurst -LRB- who \ tdied in 1992 -RRB- , was .
Mr Jennings thought that the person at Binder Hamlyn might have been relaying to him information provided to Binder Hamlyn by Christie \ 's .
\ xc2 \ x95 \ tIn late September 1991 , the receiver authorised Mr John Austin of Austin Desmond Fine Art Ltd of Great Russell Street , London to inspect the picture at Bourlet \ 's warehouse in the company of a client known as `` Benny Munch '' ; he inspected it on 27 September 1991 .
\ n \ tAccording to Mr Stevens \ ' report , he asked Mr John Austin who had seen the picture \ ton 27 September 1991 -LRB- as set out at paragraph 28 -RRB- to inspect the picture ; his opinion \ twas that the tears had not been there when he had seen it prior to the fire , the board \ twas more bowed and the picture was no longer flat .
After that meeting Mr Stephens was asked by the loss adjusters for a \ tsuggestion as to a person who would give a second opinion ; Mr Stevens suggested to \ tthe loss adjusters that they consult Mr James Roundell , the director of Christie \ 's to \ twhom I referred at paragraph 8 .
\ tOn 8 July 1993 , after an abortive attempt to inspect the picture in London , Mr \ tDauberville again inspected it in Paris .
Mr LeBouc was a dealer in Paris \ tspecialising in works of art on paper for over 30 years ; he specialised in the works of \ n \ tPicasso and Chagall .
On 16 January 1992 there was a further \ ttelephone conversation between Mr Jennings and the accountant acting as receiver at \ tBinder Hamlyn .
\ n \ tOn 17 January 1992 Mr Michael Bell -LRB- to whom I referred at paragraph 28 -RRB- wrote to \ tMr Brynildsen to say that he had had expressions of interest from two acquaintances ; \ tone of them , was a surgeon and the other a businessman from the north of England \ twho had funds from the sale of shares and was interested in acquiring the pastel for \ tabout $ 3m .
\ tLater in 1992 , Mr Brynildsen was contacted by Blease Lloyd Associates , chartered accountants specialising in financial and international taxation advice based in Richmond , Surrey and in Jersey .
Mr Wheldon then contacted Kate Ganz , an active art dealer since 1979 \ twith galleries in London first and then in New York .
On the way to the inspection by Ms Ganz Mr Wheldon had a motor \ tcar accident and did not attend ; Mr Stevens therefore was on his own when the picture \ twas viewed by Miss Ganz and two others in June 1995 .
Neither he , nor Asya \ tChorley nor Ms Ganz knew anything of the fire .
I was told on behalf of underwriters that I might apply the principles in Mannai Investments v Eagle Star -LSB- 1997 -RSB- AC 749 and in \ t Investors compensation Scheme v West Bromwich Building Society -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR 896 .
\ n The damage caused by the fire \ tIn addition to the evidence of Mr Stevens which I have set out at paragraphs 33 and \ tfollowing and the evidence of the inspection carried out in Paris in July 1993 set out at \ tparagraph 40 , expert evidence was called as to the damage suffered : \ n \ t \ xc2 \ x95 \ tMr Dordevic was called on behalf of the claimants ; after study in Fine Art \ t \ tInstitutes in Europe and New York and a career as a painter , he became a restorer \ t \ tin 1982 of works of substantial importance .
He was trained \ t \ tat the British Museum and the Louvre ; after experience overseas he was appointed \ t \ tin 1975 Conservator of the Queen \ 's drawings at Windsor .
Mr Graf had not \ t \ tseen the picture and his evidence was based on the findings made by Mr Stevens .
So does the account given by Mr Stevens of the views of Mr Austin who saw the picture after the fire and who had seen it in the company of a prospective purchaser only a few days before the fire .
I accept the evidence of Mr Stevens that it was an important fact that the pastel was not on its original board ; I prefer this evidence to that of Ms Ganz who did not think that this was a significant point as , according to her , most Degas pastels had new backboards .
Mr Stevens was clearly a person of far greater expertise than Ms Ganz who I did not consider to be sufficiently expert in relation to Degas to express any opinion of weight .
\ t \ xc2 \ x95 \ tThe auction market dominated and controlled by Christie \ 's and Sotheby \ 's through \ tthe sales held each year in London and New York in the spring and autumn ; there \ tare no relevant auctions at other times of the year .
That test is , it seems to me , consistent with the approach taken in relation to the sale of goods -LRB- see Benjamin 5th edition paras 16-055 to 16-073 and McGregor 16th edition para 923 -RRB- , the approach to valuation under many statutes -LRB- such as s 160 of the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 and corresponding provisions of other revenue statutes , s. 9 of the Leasehold Reform Act 1967 and s. 459 of the Companies Act 1985 -RRB- , the observation of Colman J at paragraph 24 of his judgment in The Timbuktu -LRB- 28 March 2000 -RRB- and the general guidance by the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors as to the basis for valuations conducted by them .
In the circumstances , I will follow the approach suggested by Devlin J in Biggin v Permanite -LSB- 1951 -RSB- 1 KB 422 at 43 8-9 .
\ n \ tFurthermore the evidence of the auction market in 1992 did not point to a very large fall in respect of the works of Degas where it is possible to draw a comparison with earlier prices : \ n \ xc2 \ x95 \ tDanseuses au Tamborin -LRB- c 1882 -RRB- although sold at Christie \ 's New York for $ 1.76 m in May 1989 , it was unsold at Christie \ 's New York in May 1992 \ xc2 \ x95 \ tLa Danseuse Russe -LRB- c 1895 -RRB- , although sold at Christie \ 's London in November 1989 for the sterling equivalent of $ 777,150 , it was sold at Sotheby \ 's New York for $ 615,000 in May 1992 \ xc2 \ x95 \ tTrois Danseuses -LRB- c 1904-6 -RRB- although sold in April 1989 at Sotheby \ 's London for \ tthe sterling equivalent of $ 1.163 m was unsold at Sotheby \ 's New York in \ tNovember 1992 at $ 950,000 .
\ n \ tFurthermore Mr Thomas \ ' evidence must be contrasted with the evidence in relation to the St James \ ' Art Group ; although I accept that there were good reasons why the picture did not sell , as it arrived towards the end of the exhibition and was not part of the exhibition , the view of as experienced a dealer as Mr Bathurst that the value of the picture was $ 3-3 .5 m must be taken into account , though , as I have stated , it was so priced to achieve a reasonably quick sale and so might be on the low side .
The range given by Mr Bathurst coincides with what I infer was the figure being contemplated by Mr Austin \ 's client and referred to as a `` serious buyer '' in the letter from the insurance broker of 26 September 1991 - $ 3m .
\ n \ tIn making my assessment , I have taken into account the prospects of finding a private purchaser without special characteristics that would make the picture specially valuable to him , the general course of the dealings on which I have already expressed my view and in particular the negotiations between Mr Thomas and the Greek shipowner , the view of Mr Bathurst and the indication of an offer made in September 1991 from Mr Austin \ 's client .
b ` Mr Justice Thomas : Introduction There is before the Court a short issue as to whether the Claimants -LRB- Syndicate 1242 -RRB- had granted a binding authority to the Defendants -LRB- MRS -RRB- , Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s brokers , enabling them to write or to authorise others to write travel insurance business for the general public in the United Kingdom .
\ n Background The binding authority which MRS claimed had been granted by Syndicate 1242 had authorised The Management Company -LRB- London -RRB- Limited -LRB- TMC -RRB- to bind or authorise other intermediaries to bind travel insurance for the general public .
\ n The events prior to August 1999 The early binding authorities In 1997 , TMC operated travel insurance schemes under binding authorities placed with Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s syndicates through other Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s brokers , T.L .
Dallas and at Paul Group International was Mr Graham Evans ; he was a broker of 30 years experience , being active in the London insurance market since 1968 .
Mr Philip Armstrong had been a class underwriter on the Brockbank syndicate and had got to know Mr Evans quite well .
\ n The binding authority written by ACE Syndicate 219 for 1999 In February 1999 , TL Dallas and Paul Group International became insolvent and Mr Evans joined MRS as a broker with two colleagues , Mr Mark Hooper and Mr Colin Milne .
\ n Three specific additional cover holders were named \ xc2 \ x96 TMC , Journeys Travel Insurance of Staines Middlesex -LRB- Journeys -RRB- and Milsom Howard Associates -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd of Harrow .
On 21 July 1999 , Mr Slater gave a 30 day notice of cancellation of all the schemes under the binding authorities written by ACE Syndicate 219 to MRS -LRB- and the earlier brokers -RRB- in respect of TMC schemes ; the reason given was the poor performance on the 1998 year and the deterioration on the 1997 year .
It is clear Mr Evans understood that no certificates could be issued after that date ; he so informed TMC .
It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that he was not concerned about the cancellation of earlier schemes , but only about the two schemes administered by JLT Travel Services -LRB- Jardines -RRB- which had attached at 1 January 1999 and ran till 31 December 1999 and the Journeys \ xc2 \ x92 scheme which had attached at 1 May 1999 and ran until 30 April 2000 .
\ n Attempts were made by Mr Evans with the help of figures produced by TMC and Journeys to persuade Mr Slater and his deputy , Ms Hilary Doodes , to withdraw the notice .
It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that the figures produced by TMC were not such as to make Mr Slater change his mind and that Journeys had not explained the deterioration in the figures for the earlier year .
On 18 August 1999 , Mr Evans was informed by Ms Doodes that the notice of cancellation stood and Mr Evans informed TMC that no new certificates were to be issued after 25 August 1999 .
\ n It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that he made clear to TMC the position and there was no doubt at TMC of the gravity of the position they faced as there would be no insurer to continue to underwrite the Jardines and Journeys schemes , unless either ACE Syndicate 219 changed its mind or he found a new underwriter .
\ n I am quite satisfied that when the notice of cancellation was issued on 21 July Mr Evans realised the seriousness of the position and that after the meeting of 3 August 1999 , he knew that there was little chance that Mr Slater would change his mind .
Mr Evans , however , kept in touch with Mr Armstrong and learnt from him of Mr Armstrong \ xc2 \ x92s continued interest in writing this business .
It was the evidence of Mr Evans that he had heard that Mr Slater might leave ACE Syndicate 219 and that , if he did , then the binding authority might be lost .
His evidence was that he met Mr Armstrong on 14 and 15 July 2000 at which they discussed the possibility of Mr Slater leaving ACE Syndicate 219 and of Mr Armstrong writing travel business for the year 2000 ; Mr Evans also said that he believed that it was at this time that he discussed the possibility of Mr Armstrong taking over the binding authorities written by the Busbridge Syndicate .
\ n The preparation of a new binding authority Sometime at the end of July or the beginning of August 1999 , Mr Hooper was asked by Mr Evans to prepare a new binding authority with an inception date of 1 August 1999 .
The binding authority was also to incorporate the terms of LPO 228 , but was on significant points very different to that which had been granted by Mr Slater : \ n Although MRS was named as coverholder and TMC , Journeys and Milsom Howard Associates -LRB- UK -RRB- Limited were named as additional coverholders , the document provided : \ n \ xc2 \ x93And such additional coverholders as may be agreed by the Coverholder \ xc2 \ x94 This meant that instead of control over those who were authorised vesting in the leading underwriter -LRB- as it had done in the binding authority granted by ACE Syndicate 219 -RRB- , it vested in MRS .
Mr Hooper was recorded as the name of the Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s broker contract manager or senior person responsible .
\ n The meeting at Rushlake Green It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that after the meeting with Mr Slater on 3 August 1999 , he gave a copy of the proposed binding authority to Syndicate 1242 .
He then met Mr Armstrong at the Horse and Groom , Rushlake Green , East Sussex and had dinner .
It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that they discussed the binding authority and that , when he asked Mr Armstrong whether he would have the binding authority , he said he would \ xc2 \ x93have it \ xc2 \ x94 .
He said that he would have to get Mr Stuart Newcombe involved as he was the class underwriter for Syndicate 1242 for personal accident business -LRB- which included travel insurance -RRB- , \ xc2 \ x93but he assured -LSB- Mr Evans -RSB- that he would put down his line for such a -LSB- binding authority -RSB- , and it was simply a matter of sorting the formalities out with Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x94 .
He said that he made it clear to Mr Evans that he would not commit the Syndicate without satisfactory underwriting statistics being provided and Mr Newcombe being satisfied as to the terms for underwriting the binding authority .
\ n Mr Newcombe was the class underwriter for personal accident business of Syndicate 1242 which he had joined in September 1998 ; travel insurance was therefore his particular responsibility , though he was answerable to Mr Armstrong , as the active underwriter of the syndicate .
Dallas binding authority in 1998 when he was at another syndicate and had dealt with Mr Evans then .
\ n The involvement of Mr Newcombe After Mr Evans had seen Mr Armstrong , he approached Mr Newcombe with the draft binding authority and the CD4 and CD4A .
Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x92s evidence was that he was told by Mr Evans that Mr Slater had gone to a different company and his syndicate was not prepared to carry on with the scheme ; he mentioned difficulties with the amount of premium income they had received .
He told Mr Newcombe that the binding authority was for a block of travel insurance business including Journeys and Jardines ; he requested Mr Newcombe to lead the binding authority .
\ n Mr Newcombe told Mr Evans that the 1998 figures had ruined his personal accident account at his last syndicate and that was why he had declined to continue in 1999 .
I accept his evidence about this meeting and in every case where his evidence conflicts with that of Mr Evans , I prefer the evidence of Mr Newcombe .
I also find that Mr Evans knew that Mr Newcombe would not write the binding authority without information and would have sent him immediately away and had nothing further to do with the proposal , if he had told him the true reasons for the cancellation .
\ n Mr Newcombe then spoke to Mr Armstrong about the proposed binding authority ; he was told by Mr Armstrong that he had referred Mr Evans to him to carry out an underwriting assessment and he had given no commitment to write the binding authority .
I consider the knowledge of Mr Newcombe and Mr Armstrong below .
\ n During the course of the autumn , when Mr Evans made his frequent visits to the box of Syndicate 1242 in connection with other matters , he asked Mr Newcombe whether he would write the binding authority .
\ n Mr Evans also pressed Mr Armstrong on such visits to put his line down , but he was told by Mr Armstrong that he would not commit his syndicate until the information requested by Mr Newcombe was provided .
It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that he pressed TMC to provide the information ; he made it clear to TMC that Syndicate 1242 would not write the binding authority unless the figures were provided .
\ n The meeting between Mr Evans , Mr Newcombe and Mr Armstrong in January 2000 Sometime in late December 1999 or early January 2000 , Mr Evans visited Mr Newcombe with a specific request to him to \ xc2 \ x93pick up \ xc2 \ x94 Syndicate 1242 \ xc2 \ x92s line on the scheme .
\ n He therefore arranged a meeting with Mr Evans and Mr Armstrong which took place in January 2000 .
The terms were similar to those in respect of the binding authority Mr Evans had been pressing Mr Newcombe and Mr Armstrong to accept for the period incepting 1 August 1999 .
These were new requirements which he considered necessary in view of the failure of Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 clients to provide the information he was seeking ; these were much tougher terms than those on the draft binding authorities provided by MRS. \ n To emphasise , in the face of the pressure from Mr Evans , that no cover had been given and to make clear these requirements were merely points for discussion and minimum requirements , he wrote on the note : \ n \ xc2 \ x93Not binding / No cover given \ xc2 \ x94 Mr Newcombe explained all these requirements to Mr Evans .
As an experienced broker , Mr Evans must have known that the information was required to enable Mr Newcombe to make a proper underwriting assessment .
I accept that Mr Evans was annoyed and probably very angry with Mr Newcombe .
Although Mr Armstrong accepted that he saw Mr Evans at some stage after the meeting and that Mr Evans was angry as more information was being sought , he denied he gave any such assurance .
\ n Sometime later in January 2000 , Mr Evans returned to see Mr Newcombe with figures on a single sheet of paper ; Mr Armstrong was present .
\ n The meeting between Mr Evans and Mr Armstrong in February 2000 and the writing on the binding authority .
Instead , Mr Evans approached Mr Armstrong .
\ n It was Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence that he had not at first noticed that the note given to him by Mr Newcombe had had written on it \ xc2 \ x93Not binding / No cover given \ xc2 \ x94 , but when this was pointed out to him by his colleague , Mark Hooper , he resolved to get written confirmation of the cover from Mr Armstrong ; it was his evidence that he could not go on having Mr Armstrong reassuring him that a line would be put down and Mr Newcombe saying something different .
\ n Prior to seeing Mr Armstrong he carried out some calculations with Mr Hooper about premium income ; these suggested that the premium income written after the cancellation notice issued by Mr Slater under the Jardines and Journeys schemes could be covered by an agreement by Mr Armstrong to write \ xc2 \ xa3750 ,000 of premium income .
\ n At a date during February 2000 which could not be identified with any precision , Mr Armstrong and Mr Evans had a meeting during which Mr Armstrong wrote in pencil on the binding authority , the following : \ n \ xc2 \ x93H/C -LSB- Held covered -RSB- 100 % to 1242 - Income no more than \ xc2 \ xa3750 ,000 - SN -LSB- Stewart Newcombe -RSB- requirements met - Advise signing \ xc2 \ x94 \ tMr Armstrong added the initials of the Syndicate in pencil under these words , but did not append the stamp of Syndicate 1242 .
Mr Newcombe was not aware of the meeting ; he was not told of it by Mr Armstrong or Mr Evans and was not told of what had been written on the binding authority by Mr Armstrong in the name of Syndicate 1242 .
The fact that the line was in pencil did not matter ; by the time of the trial , it was accepted by Mr Armstrong and Syndicate 1242 that a Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s syndicate could commit itself by a line in pencil .
\ n Although looking at the binding authority and the annotation in the name of Syndicate 1242 against the background which I have outlined , there might be several possible interpretations upon the meeting between Mr Armstrong and Mr Evans and the annotation by Mr Armstrong , the Syndicate 1242 and MRS put forward two alternative cases : \ n MRS contended that Syndicate 1242 had committed itself on the terms of the binding authority and Mr Armstrong \ xc2 \ x92s manuscript .
\ n Syndicate 1242 contended that they had not ; a clear oral agreement had been made under which Mr Armstrong had agreed that Syndicate 1242 would agree to write a line subject to the provision of the information requested by Mr Newcombe .
Mr Armstrong had noted the binding authority to express that agreement and to provide some comfort to Mr Evans .
Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence was that Mr Armstrong knew that Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x92s requirements had not been met , but he felt he needed to give comfort to Mr Evans and to honour his previous assurances that he would write the business .
Mr Armstrong had insisted adding the words \ xc2 \ x93SN requirements met \ xc2 \ x94 ; this was to make clear that for the purposes of the agreement Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x92s requirements were to be treated as met .
He said it was perfectly clear to him and to Mr Evans that there was no coverage until Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x92s requirements were met .
\ n Subsequent events The binding authority for the year commencing 1 January 2000 The evidence of Mr Evans was that it was necessary for TMC to provide the information that Mr Newcombe required and to agree to the terms proposed by Mr Newcombe for the binding authority for the period commencing 1 January 2000 ; it was his evidence that once this information was provided and the terms agreed , the premium income would be allocated between the two binding authorities and both binding authorities would be stamped together .
\ n Although , according to Mr Evans , TMC were informed of the fact that Syndicate 1242 had put down its held covered line in pencil , it is not clear what happened as between TMC and MRS. For example , in a letter to Syndicate 1242 \ xc2 \ x92s solicitors dated 7 June 2001 , CMS Cameron McKenna on behalf of MRS stated that no travel insurance schemes were bound by MRS under the binding authority and no confirmation was given to TMC or anyone else that there was cover for a travel insurance scheme ; they had not authorised the issue of policies under the binding authority .
No one from TMC or MRS , other than Mr Evans provided any evidence to the court .
\ n Attempts to obtain the figures Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 evidence was that he and Mr Mark Hooper continued to chase TMC for the information ; on 7 April 2000 , Mr Evans sent a fax to TMC in which he pressed for information about : \ n i -RRB- \ tthe premium income for the Jardines and Journeys schemes for the period 1 August to 31 December 1999 , the claims for that period on the Jardines scheme -LRB- he already had that on Journeys -RRB- .
\ tMr Evans concluded by stating : \ xc2 \ x93 Sorry to be so longwinded , but I can not proceed with -LSB- Mr Armstrong -RSB- without the above information which I must say that up to now I thought we had .
It was not clear on the evidence before me -LRB- including the response by TMC on 11 April 2000 to the fax of 7 April 2000 -RRB- which insurer or syndicate -LRB- if any -RRB- had been insuring during the period 1 August to 31 December 1999 the schemes other than Jardines and Journeys mentioned in the fax .
It would appear that either the position was similar to that in respect of Jardines and Journeys and no insurer had in fact written the business -LRB- in breach of the Insurance Companies Act -RRB- or MRS and TMC were contemplating transferring from an insurer who had written this apparently profitable business to Syndicate 1242 to compensate that syndicate for taking the Jardines and Journeys schemes -LRB- as foreshadowed in the figures shown to Mr Newcombe as set out in paragraph 35 and the information requested by Mr Newcombe referred to at paragraph 38 .
\ n After the Syndicate had ceased writing any further business , Mr Evans visited the box and saw Mr Newcombe .
Mr Evans said nothing to him about the pencilled annotation initialled in the name of Syndicate 1242 by Mr Armstrong .
\ n The enquiries within MRS in July 2000 and the notification to the Regulators On 6 July 2000 , Mr Ray Watson , the compliance officer of MRS , and Mr Allen of MRS telephoned Mr Pain of MRS to arrange a meeting on 7 July 2000 to discuss the position in relation to the travel insurance business .
\ xc2 \ x94 \ tThe note went on to record Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 account of matters ; that the binding authority for 2000 had been prepared , as Syndicate 1242 did not want the premium income falling into 1999 and the premium income on the balance of the schemes -LRB- \ xc2 \ xa33 .8 m -RRB- would be written into the 2000 year ; that although Mr Armstrong had verbally committed his syndicate to this binding authority for the period incepting 1 January 2000 , there was no written commitment by Mr Armstrong .
The note also recorded a visit by Mr Watson and Mr Allen to Mr Armstrong to ask him his recollection ; the note states : \ n \ xc2 \ x93 -LSB- Mr Armstrong -RSB- confirmed that he had committed the syndicate to the first period but had never bound the second slip and that due to the size of the premium income compared with his -LSB- personal accident stamp -RSB- capacity could not have written it any way \ xc2 \ x94 The note further recorded the position as to what MRS thought TMC had been told .
\ n On 12 July 2000 , there was a meeting between Mr Evans and Mr Watson of MRS and Mr Reynolds , the deputy underwriter of Syndicate 1242 .
He had learnt that Syndicate 1242 had not retained any documents other than a copy of the binding authority -LRB- without the annotation -RRB- and Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x92s note of the information required ; he had also learnt of the contact between Mr Armstrong and MRS about the binding authority after he had left Syndicate 1242 .
Mr Watson and Mr Evans concentrated on the figures and the development of the account ; they appreciated that they were asking Syndicate 1242 to backdate the cover to August 1999 .
The note of this meeting written by Mr Watson contains an account by Mr Evans of the reasons why he approached Syndicate 1242 to write the risk in August 1999 .
Consequently we are concerned that third parties have been given to believe that it had been so underwritten , resulting in Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s paper being issued and blank paper issued without Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s authority \ xc2 \ x94 \ tNotification was also given to Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Regulatory Department by CMS Cameron McKenna , acting on behalf of ACE Global Markets , the E&O underwriters of MRS .
Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s very shortly thereafter notified the Financial Services Authority and the Department of Trade and Industry .
On 7 August 2000 , Mr Armstrong wrote to Syndicate 1242 -LRB- with a copy to Mr Watson of MRS -RRB- setting out his understanding : \ n \ xc2 \ x93It was my intention that the Syndicate should participate in this scheme , but that our involvement was subject to an income limitation and , more importantly to the requirements of Stuart Newcombe being met .
I had various discussions with Graham Evans about the facility but had left the detailed underwriting work to -LSB- Mr Newcombe -RSB- as the coverage fell under his particular area of expertise .
On 16 February 2000 , Mr Evans spoke to Mr Armstrong and faxed details of the claim to him .
Mr Newcombe and Mr Armstrong recalled the claim being made ; their evidence was that they rejected the notification on the basis that Syndicate 1242 was not on risk .
Mr Newcombe \ xc2 \ x92s evidence was that they made it clear to Mr Evans that Syndicate 1242 was not on risk and that the claim was not for Syndicate 1242 .
However although the sending of the claim can be precisely dated as 16 February 2000 , the meeting between Mr Armstrong and Mr Evans at which Mr Armstrong wrote on the binding authority in February 2000 can not .
If the meeting took place after , it would explain why Mr Evans was pressing for a commitment and it would have made it obvious to Mr Armstrong that there was no underwriter on risk and that insurance was being written in contravention of the Insurance Companies Act and required him immediately to report the state of affairs to the regulators at Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s .
\ n However the crucial question is whether at the meeting with Mr Evans he orally agreed that Syndicate 1242 would only be committed to the binding authority if the information requested by Mr Newcombe was provided .
My reasons are as follows : \ n I am satisfied that Mr Armstrong had consistently and from the outset referred Mr Evans to Mr Newcombe for him to review the figures and make the underwriting decision .
\ n Although I accept that Mr Armstrong very probably made reassuring remarks to Mr Evans to the effect that the Syndicate was seriously interested in writing the binding authority and told him words to the effect that he should not worry , I am satisfied that he never actually promised to write the binding authority without the provision of satisfactory underwriting information .
\ n Mr Armstrong knew that the information requested by Mr Newcombe had not been provided .
-LRB- iii -RRB- Mr Newcombe knew that ACE Syndicate 219 had cancelled ; when he had enquired of Mr Evans as to who was writing the business in the period after the cancellation , he was told it was \ xc2 \ x93in hand \ xc2 \ x94 .
I do not consider that Mr Armstrong focussed on the position ; I am sure that if Mr Armstrong , when he annotated the slip , had been committing his syndicate unconditionally , he would have had to make more careful enquiries about the period after the cancellation by ACE Syndicate 219 and the position would have become clear to him , as it did to Mr Reynolds at the meeting of 12 July 2000 .
In short , Mr Armstrong was an honest underwriter , though weak and somewhat foolish ; I am satisfied that he made clear the position and the agreement he made with Mr Evans was that Syndicate 1242 was not to be contractually committed until the information required by Mr Newcombe had been supplied .
\ n Mr Evans never returned to Syndicate 1242 with any information after the meeting with Mr Armstrong ; he never requested that a stamp be put down .
I do not accept that this was because he had got cover ; it was because he had got as much comfort as he could from Mr Armstrong and knew that he could take the matter no further until he had got the information required by Mr Newcombe .
\ n Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 failure to mention the pencilled annotation to Mr Newcombe when he saw him in the circumstances mentioned in paragraph 58 is inconsistent with a belief on Mr Evans \ xc2 \ x92 part at the time that there was cover .
\ n I do not attach any weight to the passage in the memorandum of July 7 th in which Mr Armstrong is recorded as having told Mr Watson and Mr Allen of MRS that he had committed the syndicate .
Neither Mr Watson nor Mr Allen were called to give evidence and the account was contradicted shortly thereafter by Mr Armstrong \ xc2 \ x92s letter of 7 August .
\ n The approach by Mr Wilson and Mr Allen to Mr Reynolds on 12 July 2000 is again inconsistent with a commitment having been given .
He knew also that Mr Armstrong would not commit his syndicate until information was provided to Mr Newcombe and he could not obtain information from TMC which would satisfy Mr Newcombe ; he had already misled Mr Newcombe about the reason why ACE Syndicate 219 had cancelled -LRB- as I have set out at paragraph 28 -RRB- In that desperate position , he pressured Mr Armstrong -LRB- who was not a strong character and under considerable other pressures -RRB- in to providing the pencilled annotation as something to give comfort until he could put together the whole arrangement for 1999 and 2000 and provide the information required .
Thereafter , he could not complete this task quickly because of the lack of information from TMC ; he was still trying to obtain information that would have satisfied Mr Newcombe when Syndicate 1242 ceased accepting further business .
He knew perfectly well that there was not as Mr Armstrong had made it perfectly clear to him -LRB- and he had so agreed -RRB- that there would be no cover until the information required by Mr Newcombe had been provided and the detailed terms of the binding authority -LRB- including which schemes were to be covered -RRB- were agreed .
The form was not before the court during the hearing and so neither Mr Newcombe nor Mr Armstrong were asked about it .
It was submitted on behalf of MRS that as the essential issue was what had been agreed between Mr Armstrong and Mr Evans , the other persons at MRS could not take the matter further .
Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s estimated that there were in excess of 130,000 members of the public who had travel insurance under the schemes organised through TMC who were yet to travel and for whom replacement cover was not in place .
The Court received notification from Jardines and from Voyagers Assistance Limited and an associated company ; having considered those notifications and the arguments of the parties before the court , I intend , subject to any further representations , to vacate the period reserved in September and terminate the present litigation as there is no further issue presently before the court for determination and no party presently wishes to seek a determination .
It was expressed to be read and had effect according to English law , and as a contract made in England it provided that all disputes arising in connection with it were to be settled by ICC Arbitration in London .
In February 1998 Marconi was sold by GEC to FIR Systems Inc , which was incorporated in Kansas , United States .
Mr. Timothy Hill , on behalf of Federal , relies on the twin facts that IFR was threatening to break the Marconi Agreement if Federal would not enter into a new agreement and the impracticality of Federal litigating to preserve that agreement .
Ever since the seminal decision of the House of Lords in Heyman v. Darwins Ltd -LSB- 1942 -RSB- AC 356 , the English courts have been working out the concept of the separability of arbitration agreements .
The English underwriters claimed in the English courts declarations that the policy -LRB- made in London -RRB- was void as contrary to public policy or that it was voidable because the assured had failed to disclose that the jewellery insured was to be smuggled into Italy .
However , since the decisions of Kerr J. in Occidental Worldwide Investment Corporation v. Skibs A/S Avanti -LRB- The Siboen and The Sibotre -RRB- -LSB- 1976 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 293 , of Mocatta J. in North Ocean Shipping Co. Ltd v. Hyundai Construction Co. Ltd -LSB- 1979 -RSB- Q.B. 705 , and of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Pao on v. Lau Yiu Long -LSB- 1980 -RSB- AC 614 , that limitation has been discarded ; and it is now accepted that economic pressure may be sufficient to amount to duress for this purpose , provided at least that the economic pressure may be characterised as illegitimate and has constituted a significant cause inducing the plaintiff to enter into the relevant contract -LRB- see Barton v. Armstrong -LSB- 1976 -RSB- AC 104 , 121 , per Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon of Glaisdale -LRB- referred to with approval in Pao On v. Lau Yiu Long -LSB- 1980 -RSB- AC 614 , 635 , per Lord Scarman -RRB- and Crescendo Management Pty .
Although , it would at least in theory be possible for a doctrine of duress whether physical or otherwise to be developed in the criminal law which differed materially from that of the law of contract , it is instructive to note that in the earlier case of DPP v. Lynch -LSB- 1975 -RSB- AC 653 , the House of Lords , in analysing the basis of a defence of duress to a charge of aiding and abetting murder , proceeded on the basis that duress does not negative intent or render involuntary conduct thereby induced : see Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at page 670F and 675E-F , and Lord Wilberforce at page 680 A-C , including his observation that duress does not destroy the will to enter into the contract but prevents the law from accepting what has happened as a contract valid in law .
At page 695 A-C Lord Simon of Glaisdale said this : `` I hope indeed to have demonstrated that duress is not inconsistent with act and will , the will being deflected not destroyed ; so that the intention conflicts with the wish .
\ ' This conception is in line with what was said in this Board \ 's decision in Barton v. Armstrong -LSB- 1976 -RSB- AC 104 , 121 by Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon of Glaisdale \ xc2 \ x96 observations with which the majority judgment appears to be in agreement .
All these matters are , as was recognised in Maskell v. Horner -LSB- 1915 -RSB- 3 K.B .
\ tIt was submitted by Mr. Hill on behalf of Federal , before he was disinstructed , that although the 1998 Agreement is in form drafted as a distribution agreement providing for the sale of equipment by IFR to Federal and its resale by Federal to customers , in substance that agreement operated as an agency agreement so as to constitute Federal a commercial agent within Article 1 -LRB- 2 -RRB- of the Council Directive , which reads as follows : `` For the purposes of this Directive , \ ` commercial agent \ ' shall mean a self-employed intermediary who has continuing authority to negotiate the sale or the purchase of goods on behalf of another person , hereinafter called the \ ` principal \ ' , or to negotiate and conclude such transactions on behalf of and in the name of the principal .
By a letter to the court dated 12 th June 2001 Mr. Hill , in asking for a hearing so that he could explain his failure to draw the court \ 's attention to the Amendment Regulations and to give information about Federal \ 's failure to comply with the condition as to standing out the Milan proceedings , advanced the argument that at the time when the 1998 Agreement was entered into the Amendment Regulations were not yet in force , and , accordingly , the law and jurisdiction clause was unenforceable as a derogation and because local law , presumably Italian law , did not permit it to have effect .
\ n \ tIn the meantime , LUK had accused AP of infringing certain LUK patents by reason of the delivery of twin-mass flywheels to BMW -LRB- items wholly distinct from clutch technology -RRB- .
When this tactic failed , AP counter-attacked by contending that LUK was infringing the patents licensed to KTM by virtue of a clutch control system supplied by LUK to Mercedes Benz .
The stakes were raised yet further when LUK responded by claiming that AP had infringed LUK patents in regard to the clutch mechanism supplied by AP to Renault .
\ n \ tIn early 1998 KTM was asked to assist AP in resolving the escalating dispute with LUK .
In return for an undertaking by KTM not to pursue LUK for any infringement of the assigned patents , AP arranged a non-exclusive licence of the omitted patents in favour of KTM .
\ n \ tThere matters rested until the summer of 1998 when ironically KTM was acquired by LUK .
Stig Trondvold who , having been Managing Director of Kongsberg Automotive Technology , became Managing Director of KTM until shortly after its acquisition by LUK .
\ t Mr John Comfort , another employee of AP who became an engineer at KTM .
But in due course Siemens dropped out of the negotiations and AP and Kongsberg were left to form a joint venture of their own .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d The memorandum also proposed that AP and Kongsberg would \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9c license all their respective IPR \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s which are used in the business of the JVG Companies to the JVG companies \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ tThe negotiations culminated in the Shareholder Agreement dated the 21st December 1995 , signed on behalf of AP by Mr Roger Wood and on behalf of Kongsberg by Mr Voldall .
In like terms , this recited that \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cAP and Kongsberg wish to participate as shareholders in the Company and intend to transfer all their technology and businesses relating to the design , manufacture and sale of automated clutch and transmission systems for automotive use to the Company and on the terms set out in this Agreement .
In a note of a visit to Siemens in Toulouse by representatives of the joint venture in July 1996 , there is reference to concern on the part of Siemens that hydraulic systems would not capture the high volume market since it was in their view inherently more expensive than the electro-mechanical approach adopted by some of the joint venture \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s competitors .
Not to be outdone , LUK raised the stakes again by asserting that AP was in conflict with LUK patents as regards the supply of parts to Renault for the \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cTwingo \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ tThe rumbling dispute between AP and LUK was discussed by the Board of KTM on the 30th January 1998 and the Board concluded that it was not willing to enter into a confrontation with LUK .
\ n \ tThe challenge by AP to the effect that LUK were infringing their own and/or KTM \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s patents in regard to the supply of equipment to Mercedes led to an assessment by KTM of the relevance of the omitted patents to existing business of KTM and LUK respectively .
In his presentation to the Board in January 1998 , Mr Trondvold concluded that , whilst the vast majority were of no significance as regards KTM , some were potentially relevant to the electrically actuated shifts produced by LUK .
\ n \ tBy now AP had sought KTM \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s help in resolving the dispute with LUK .
The effect of the agreement was that , in return for KTM waiving any rights on the patents already transferred to them in respect of the activities of LUK , AP were to arrange for INC to grant a licence to KTM , on a non-exclusive royalty-free basis , for all the omitted patents .
\ n THE CLAIM \ tOver a year after the acquisition of KTM by LUK in September 1998 , their solicitors wrote to AP threatening proceedings .
\ n THE COMMON INTENTION \ tIt was the evidence of Mr Gould -LRB- the lead negotiator for AP -RRB- and a Mr Wood -LRB- to whom Mr Gould reported -RRB- that the common intention was to merge the existing ACTS business of AP and Kongsberg .
But the contemporary view was that the hydraulic technology was to be preferred : see Borg and Beck \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Business Review June 1995 \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cWe have chosen the right technology but we must continue development to maintain current advantage .
The joint venture company was a relatively high-risk venture and if you look at the annual reports of Kongsberg in Norway , they refer to it in those terms , and we too thought it was a high-risk venture .
The only faint indication of interest in electrically actuated technology was contained in Mr Shirley \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s note of a visit to Siemens in July 1996 -LRB- see above -RRB- .
\ n REACTION OF KONGSBERG \ tIt was accepted by Mr Trondvold that he became aware of the existence of the omitted patents as early as August 1997 when the dispute with Mercedes arose .
\ n \ tThe subsequent negotiations leading to the non-exclusive licence of the omitted patents whereby KTM , in return , waived the right to use the assigned patents against LUK -LRB- unless LUK initiated action -RRB- , is also revealing .
\ n BREACH OF CONTRACT \ tMy conclusion on the issue of rectification makes it unnecessary to consider other issues relating to the existence and exercise of any authority on the part of Mr Gould or Mr Wood to contract on behalf of INC , issues relating to Section 33 of the Patents Act 1977 and Section 261 of the US Patents Act 35 USCA and issues relating to the impact of delay on the exercise of the discretionary remedy of rectification .
The breach consisted of Ascot interfering with the contract of carriage by causing the cargo to be off-loaded at Havana in Cuba rather than at Owendo .
Ascot chartered a vessel originally called the Agra , but later renamed the Lemania , to carry three parcels of rice to West Africa , two of which were for Olam , ie the Owendo parcel of 3,000 metric tonnes and a parcel of 5,500 metric tonnes destined for Tema , Ghana .
On 22 October 1998 Olam entered into a further contract with AEA for the sale by Olam to AEA of 1,000 metric tonnes + / - 10 % Vietnamese white rice at the same price of $ 399 per metric tonne , shipment per MV Far East , for which an irrevocable letter of credit was to be provided by 30 November 1998 or before the arrival of the Agra in Owendo .
The contract between Olam and AEA for this parcel of rice contained the following special condition : `` The buyer has provided the seller as collateral on MV Far East , the BL No A , three originals of 880 MT and BL No E , three originals of 275 MT of MV Agra .
Arguments developed between Ascot , Olam and AEA .
On 11 May 1999 , Ascot agreed to buy the Owendo parcel from AEA .
I continue to refer to it for convenience as the `` Owendo parcel '' , although what in fact happened was that an associate company of Ascot bought the Agra and caused here to be sailed to Cuba , where the cargo was off-loaded .
Olam \ 's case was that it owned the 1155 metric tonnes covered by bills of lading A&E , having re-acquired it from AEA in exchange for the 1,000 metric tonnes of rice ex Far East and that its loss was the sum of $ 365,000 , which it paid Ascot to acquire the Far East rice .
Buyers had in their possession documents of title for 1155 metric tonnes of rice and were thereby entitled to expect to take delivery of that rice in Owendo , and sellers , by interfering with the contract of carriage , prevented said delivery from occurring and are therefore liable to reimburse the buyers for the loss that they suffered in replacing the rice , namely US $ 365,000 .
At paragraph 2.6 they reproduced the following section of Ascot \ 's submissions , which set out its case on appeal : `` Ascot \ 's case is that in those circumstances : -LRB- 1 -RRB- following its sale to AEA in October 1998 of the 3,300 metric tonnes cargo ex the Lemania , Olam had no interest in the cargo entitling it to maintain any claim against Ascot for detention or conversion or breach of the sale contract .
Instead , its true loss , if it had suffered any , was whatever it had lost through being deprived of its security afforded by its possession of bills A&E for payment by AEA for the MV Far East cargo .
Olam do not suggest AEA is unable to pay for the Far East cargo , simply that it has not done so .
The award then set out Ascot \ 's complaints about the first tier tribunal \ 's approach as follows : `` 2.7 The arbitrators made no specific finding on the factual issue as to whether Olam had re-purchased from AEA the 1155 metric tonnes on board the Lemania or whether were provided by AEA with bills of lading A&E simply as security for payment for that quantity of cargo sold to them ex MV Far East .
If Ascot is right that the bills were intended only to provide Olam with security for the price of the Far East cargo then endorsement/delivery of those bills to them could not and did not make them owner of the cargo to which they related .
It can simply take effect to pursue AEA for the price of the Far East cargo .
At paragraph 3.19 the Board recorded the following submission : `` As a result of Ascot \ 's breaches of contract , Olam claimed that they had sold the goods and received payment for the entire 3,300 tonnes from AEA Gabon .
In order to mitigate the situation Olam took back 1155 tonnes from AEA and provided them with a substitute quantity of rice ex MV Far East , also purchased from Ascot .
Before carrying on with the Board \ 's summary in its award of the case presented to it , I should observe that after those initial submissions had been served , Olam had produced its October 1998 contract with AEA for the sale of the 1,000 metric tonnes ex Far East .
This had prompted Ascot to observe that there had not been a cargo swap and that Olam were merely pledgees of bills of lading A&E for the 1,000 metric tonnes + / - 10 % on the Agra .
Shortly before the adjudication by the first tier tribunal , Olam \ 's solicitors had forward supplemental submissions in which they had said : `` The rice aboard the Far East was delivered to AEA on or around 26 October 1998 .
Hence buyers did not return bills of lading A&E to AEA .
In particular , they recorded the following : `` 3.24 -LRB- iii -RRB- Although Olam did receive payment from AEA for the Owendo parcel they subsequently took back bills of lading A&E in respect of 1155 metric tonnes of this parcel as security for payment in respect of a substitute parcel of 1,000 metric tonnes rice on board the Far East , also purchased from Ascot .
This was on condition that AEA pay for the substitute parcel of rice by 30 November 1998 or prior to the arrival of the vessel to Owendo , whichever was the earlier .
The deadline of 30 November passed without payment b AEA and Olam therefore seized the relevant portion of rice on board the Lemania under the bills of lading A&E as their collateral .
Hence Olam were entitled to seize their collateral under bills of lading A&E and as re-endorsed to them by AEA in the form of the clear words Livre a laudre d \ ` Olam International Limited adjacent to AEA \ 's stamp and signature .
Once the deadline of 30 November 1998 passed without AEA making payment for the Far East parcel , Olam held bills of lading A&E as documents of title to the equivalent portion of rice on board the Lemania .
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Olam admits -LRB- a -RRB- it sold the cargo to AEA and was paid for it ; -LRB- b -RRB- it never repurchased the cargo from AEA : see the endorsement of bills A and E were solely for the purpose of providing collateral for AEA \ 's obligation to pay the price of the Far East cargo .
Its case is simply that AEA has not as yet done so but , even if there were such evidence , Olam \ 's loss would necessarily be limited to that part of the price of the Far East cargo which it could have recovered through selling the rice at Owendo .
In a supplemental written statement , which had stood as his evidence in-chief , he had said : `` The allegation made by Ascot that these bitts of lading were only pledged to Olam by AEA and that we had no right to demand delivery of the rice for Owendo , nor any title to it , is incorrect .
Under the substitute contract , which Olam concluded with AEA for another parcel of rice on board the Far East , AEA were to pay us by 30 November 1998 .
Olam therefore held bills of A&E for the 1155 metric tonnes rice on board the Agra as documents of title .
I mention this because Mr Young QC for Olam says that it was important , unchallenged evidence going to the nature of the October 1998 agreement between Olam and AEA .
Reference has been made to the following parts of those notes : `` 22.10.98 : Because of delay , Olam agreed to give AEA 1000 tonnes on Far East .
From Olam \ 's submission it was acknowledged that these goods were invoiced to and paid for by AEA Gabon .
If the Agra arrived first , AEA would take the Agra rice , and the sale of the Far East rice would be rescinded .
If the Far East arrived first , AEA would take the Far East rice and relinquish all interest in the Agra rice .
Having studied the way in which Olam \ 's case developed and finally came to be presented in their submissions to the Board , it seems to me clear that , whilst Olam \ 's case originally appeared to be that this was a simple cargo swap , by the time the case was decided by the first tier tribunal , and certainly at the time when it was argued before the Board , its case was that bills of lading A&E were delivered as security and seized after non-payment of the purchase price for the 1000 metric tonnes ex Far East .
Mr Young fastened in his submissions on paragraph 4.2 of the award , to which I have already referred , and in particular , on the recitation from Ascot \ 's submissions in reply as follows : `` As to the issues in this appeal , it is clear from its submission to the Board : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Olam \ 's case on its alleged beneficial ownership of the goods is simply a repetition of its earlier stance , viz -LRB- a -RRB- the mere endorsement in its favour of bills of lading A&E to the owner of the goods to which they related ; and -LRB- b -RRB- it had seized the goods , as Olam describes it , after 30 November 1998 because it alleges AEA failed to pay for Far East cargo .
So , says Mr Young , Ascot plainly understood and acknowledged that they were meeting a case that this was simply a cargo swap and that full beneficial ownership of the goods passed on mere endorsement of the bills of lading .
Mr Young accused Ascot of trying to introduce subtle and legalistic arguments about the difference between outright ownership and pledge .
Having regard to the way in which Olam was putting its case , based on forfeiture of the Agra 1155 metric tonnes for non-payment of the Far East 1,000 metric tonnes , I do not think that it was properly open to the Board to accept what had been Olam \ 's original case without prior notice to the parties .
Mr Young submitted that Ascot \ 's real complaint is that its arguments were not accepted and that this can not be an irregularity .
In this case Mr Young has submitted that no serious injustice was caused on any view because even if Olam were merely pledgees of bills of lading A&E , they were bound as a matter of law to succeed for the full amount of their claim .
In support of the proposition that those matters are legally irrelevant , he has referred me to the well-known case of The Wakefield -LRB- 1902 -RRB- Probate 42 , The Sanex Ace -LRB- 1987 -RRB- 1 Lloyds Rep 465 , and The Jag Shakti -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 1 AC 337 .
It is argued by Ascot that in considering the extent to which it suffered loss through inability to enforce the particular security , it was relevant to take into account any remedy it might have against AEA .
In assessing the compensation due to Olam through interfering with the contract of carriage and thus preventing their ability to realise the security provided by the bills in the way they would have been able to do if the cargo had been landed at Owendo , was there to be taken into account that on Ascot \ 's case , Olam was well able to recover the amount form AEA by another means .
As to whether any rights against AEA were hopeless on the facts , that again is a matter on which I think it would be wrong to conclude summarily that Ascot \ 's case was hopeless .
-LSB- 2000 -RSB- LIRLR 678 , the most helpful guidance is to be found in the judgment of Robert Goff J in BP Exploration Co. -LRB- Libya -RRB- Limited v Hunt -LRB- No 2 -RRB- -LSB- 1979 -RSB- 1WLR 783 .
Again , to quote from Lord Wilberforce \ xc2 \ x92s speech in the Firestone case , at page 836 : \ xc2 \ x93In a commercial setting , it would be proper to take account of the manner in which and the time at which persons acting honestly and reasonably would pay \ xc2 \ x94 \ xc2 \ x94 Robert Goff J then concluded : \ n \ xc2 \ x93The basic principle is , however , that interest will be awarded from the date of loss .
I agree with the view of Mance J in Insurance Corporation of the Channel Islands v McHugh -LSB- 1997 -RSB- LIRLR 94 at 137 , where he said that insurance contracts are treated in law as contracts to hold the insured harmless against liability or the loss insured against ; therefore insurers are in the absence of contrary provision in breach of contract as soon as the insured liability or loss occurs .
Another example is McLean Enterprises v Ecclesiastical Insurance -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 216 , where interest was awarded by the trial judge -LRB- Staughton J -RRB- from a date some 5 weeks after the loss .
In Kuwait Airways Corporation -LRB- to which I have referred -RRB- the loss occurred shortly after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq on 2 August 1990 , but interest was only awarded from 5 December 1990 ; the judge found that it was not clear that until 12 November 1990 that a claim in respect of loss of spares was being pursued and insurers needed a little time to appreciate that fact and consider the claim .
The principle is again expressed by Robert Goff J in BP v Hunt when he described the second group of cases which were an exception to the general rule : \ n \ xc2 \ x93The second group of cases concerns the conduct of the plaintiff .
It is clear that a defendant does not have to show he has suffered prejudice : see Spittle v Bunney -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR 847 and Beahan v Stoneham -LRB- transcript , 21 January 2001 -RRB- .
In giving the leading judgment , Schiemann LJ , after referring to Johnsey Estates and another decision of the Court of Appeal -LRB- Amber v Stacey -RRB- , said : \ n \ xc2 \ x934 .
\ tBut Simon Brown LJ draws attention in paragraph 40 -LSB- in Amber v Stacey -RSB- to a possibly important consideration , that a party may be able to establish that it was their opponent \ xc2 \ x92s unreasonable conduct which prevented them making a properly informed decision about their prospects in the litigation and thus avoid what would be the usual costs order .
On 10 May 2001 the underwriters \ xc2 \ x92 solicitors made it clear that they were happy to take Mr Uppstr \ xc3 \ xb8m \ xc2 \ x92s evidence by video link from Norway ; it had already been agreed that Miss Ganz should give evidence by video link from California .
Mr Cuthbert , a director of BRS responsible for the placement , when asked in May 2001 to comment on the disparity between the primary quotation and the slip responded that : \ xc2 \ x93This would have been a negotiating point - the clause would have been put back following discussions between the underwriter and the broker .
This had arisen from a previous risk that had been underwritten in the London market in relation to a reinsurance that we had placed in 1997 , which had highlighted the possibility of it being argued that the jurisdiction applicable to the underlying policy could be the country of the reinsured while the jurisdiction for the reinsurance could be asserted as being England .
Indeed it seems surprising that neither he nor Stuart Brown , the chairman of BRS , both of whom were intimately involved in the line slip , appear to be able to speak from their own knowledge .
\ n Some reliance was placed by the defendants on a fax sent by BRS to the producing brokers in Colombia in November 1997 after the primary quotation had been made but before the primary line slip was scratched .
The media interests were by 1995 in severe financial difficulties : loans from Barclays Bank potentially in excess of US $ 17m could not be serviced or repaid .
The Defendant , Mr Edmondson , worked for Barclays Bank from 1966 to 1996 and from 1994 was the Shipping Director of the Bank \ 's Piraeus Branch .
In 1996 , after leaving the Bank , Mr Edmondson joined Mr Goymer to work as an international consultant .
The second dispute -LRB- `` The Chevron Dispute '' -RRB- concerns remuneration for the Defendants \ ' services in relation to agreements between two related companies of Ermis and Chevron Transport Corporation -LRB- `` Chevron '' -RRB- and companies in the Samsung Group respectively for the bareboat charter by the companies to Chevron and the construction for the companies by Samsung of 2 new VLCCs .
During 1995 , 1996 and 1997 Mr Goymer was involved in advising on negotiations with Barclays Bank with the aim of achieving settlement of the Claimants \ ' liabilities to the Bank .
It is also significant that the Bank had guaranteed payment of certain leasing obligations of the Ermis media interests which had a then potential outstanding exposure of some $ 6.5 m. \ r On 23 August 1995 Mr Alafouzos , Mr Sioufas and Mrs Kalafati -LRB- a director of Ermis -RRB- met officers of the Bank in London .
\ r Mr Alafouzos also provided a second hand Audi motor car which was used by Mr Edmondson in Greece .
\ r There is an issue whether the Audi car was provided in part payment or simply lent to Mr Edmondson for his use `` in recognition of his efforts in relation to '' the Barclays loans .
\ r THE CHEVRON DISPUTE The Undisputed Facts And Documents In January 1997 Chevron invited offers for the bareboat charter to it of 2 VLCC newbuildings .
\ r On 19 March , Mr Clough of ACM sent a message to Chevron stating that he -LRB- and Mr Gundy also of ACM -RRB- together with Mr Alafouzos `` and his financial adviser '' Mr Goymer were available to fly to San Francisco for a meeting with Chevron `` in order to explain owners financing and other important factors pertaining to their offer '' .
What was said at the meeting -LRB- as Chevron `` heard '' it -RRB- was recorded by Chevron in the form of handwritten notes against the list of questions and sent to Mr Clough for comment on 28 March .
Chevron took steps to seek to persuade both Daewoo and Samsung to work with ACM also .
\ r On 11 April Mr Goymer on behalf of Ermis provided Chevron with a copy of financing terms received from Banque Indosuez for one VLCC in an amount of not more than $ 76m and authorised Chevron to speak to the Bank about the matter as it saw fit .
\ r On 16 April the Defendants went to San Francisco to meet with Chevron again .
On 16 April Mr Goymer and Mr Edmondson met the representatives of Samsung in the hotel bar in San Francisco .
The terms of an amended offer were then provided to Chevron in writing by Mr Goymer and Mr Edmondson on 17 April .
\ r Mr Goymer and Mr Edmondson went to Korea arriving on 2 July .
\ r On 16 June 1998 , New York Attorneys wrote on behalf of Mr Goymer and Mr Edmondson to Mr Alafouzos claiming `` outstanding fees '' for the successful conclusion of the Chevron transaction .
\ r The Role of Mr Goymer It was Mr Alafouzos \ ' evidence that Mr Goymer and Mr Edmondson \ 's role in the Chevron transaction began and ended or at least was wholly determined by their agreement to arrange a tax lease scheme and all their work was done in the hope of gaining the commission provided for in the Mandate and because they were keen to get to know Chevron and market themselves .
Moreover , as Mr Gundy made clear and the documents bear out , Ermis \ ' offer to Chevron was not dependant on a tax lease scheme and Chevron was given assurances to that effect .
Essentially in my judgment Mr Alafouzos in paying $ 100,000 and -LRB- insofar as it related to the Chevron transaction -RRB- \ xc2 \ xa325 ,000 was recognising the wider role and value of the work in fact done by Mr Goymer and Mr Edmondson .
\ r There is no dispute that Mr Goymer told Mr Alafouzos that he and Mr Edmondson were experienced in arranging tax lease schemes and confident that they would be able to arrange such a scheme for the Chevron transaction .
\ r I accept Mr Sutton \ 's evidence that the practical reality was that a UK tax lease scheme could never have been workable for the Chevron transaction .
\ r I also accept Mr Sutton \ 's evidence that a person truly experienced in tax lease schemes should readily have recognised that such a scheme was at least most unlikely to be available for the Chevron transaction .
b ` Mr Justice Andrew Smith : This is an appeal with leave of the Court under section 69 of the Arbitration Act 1996 .
The award under appeal is a final award dated 5 April 2001 given by Messrs Colin Peerless , William Robertson and Bruce McKenzie , in which they awarded Stolt Tankers Inc. the sum of US$ 146,580.38 in respect of a demurrage claim .
The contractual voyage was from Rotterdam to `` one safe anchorage Bombay -LRB- Mumbai -RRB- or one safe berth Pirpau jetty , Bombay at Charterer \ 's option '' .
Houlder v Weir -LSB- 1905 -RSB- 2 KB 267 \ xc2 \ x96 shifting ballast -RRB- and it has the effect of causing the vessel not to be at the disposition of the charterer , demurrage stops accruing for that period , save , it is submitted , insofar as the shipowner can show that no loading or unloading -LRB- as the case may be -RRB- would have taken place during that period : see Ropner Shipping v Cleeves Western Valley Anthracite Collieries -LSB- 1927 -RSB- 1 KB 879 \ xc2 \ x85 '' \ r \ n Schofield in Laytime and Demurrage -LRB- 4 th Edition -RRB- is to broadly similar effect : `` It is well established that while a charterer \ 's obligation to complete loading or discharging within the prescribed lay times is unconditional , nevertheless lay time will not run whilst there is a delay caused by the fault of the ship owners or those for whom they are responsible .
Again , when discussing the decision of the Court of Appeal in Ropner Shipping Company Limited v Cleeves Western Valleys Anthracite Collieries Limited -LSB- 1927 -RSB- KB 879 , -LRB- 1927 -RRB- 27 Lloyd \ 's Law Rep. 317 -LRB- which I shall consider below -RRB- , Schofield suggests that laytime or time on demurrage would continue to run if , the charterers not having cargo available to load , the owners removed the vessel from a waiting berth to bunker , `` provided , of course , she was an Arrived ship and providing her removal did not result in a loss of turn '' -LRB- para 4.34 -RRB- .
This does not seem to me to add anything to the statements by Lord Shaw in William Alexander and Atkin LJ in Cantiere to which I have referred .
In this case the vessel , which was on a tank vessel voyage charter , arrived at Lattakia in Syria , but after her arrival and when only part of her cargo was discharged , she sailed away because the Master considered the port unsafe owing to war risks .
\ r \ n Support for Evans J \ 's `` wider principle '' is found in the judgment of Parker J. in Blue Anchor Line Limited v Alfred C Toepfer International GmbH -LRB- The `` Union Amsterdam '' -RRB- -LSB- 1992 -RSB- Lloyd \ 's Rep. 432 , to which Evans J refers .
\ r \ n Drawing together these authorities , I conclude that the `` wider principle '' recognised by Evans J in The Lefthero is reflected in the judgments of Donaldson J in The Shackleford , of Parker J in The Union Amsterdam , and of Lloyd J in The Tassos N .
b ` Mr Justice David Steel : Introduction The claimants bring a claim under two \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9call risks \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d policies of insurance , dated the 10th July 1997 and the 8th August 1997 , subscribed by the defendants , for losses suffered as a result of the loss of two shipments of motor vehicles which had been shipped from Japan to the Dominican Republic in July and August 1997 for onward carriage to the Turks and Caicos Islands .
\ n The first consignment was insured under a contract of insurance contained in a marine cargo policy dated 10th July 1997 by which the defendants had agreed to insure the six Toyota vehicles against all risks , for a voyage on board the \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cTopaz Ace \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d from Yokohama , Japan to Santo Domingo , warehouse to warehouse in the amount of $ 76,615.00 .
The second consignment was insured under a contract contained in a marine cargo policy dated 8th August 1997 by which the defendants agreed to insure the second set of six Toyota vehicles against all risks for a voyage on board the \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cHojin \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d from Nagoya , Japan to Santa Domingo , warehouse to warehouse in the amount of $ 93,632.00 .
The claimants \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 previous practice had been to import vehicles from Japan via Bermuda .
But in about March 1997 , a company called Cargo Express , being the local representative of the freight forwarding company used by the claimants , Tropical Shipping , offered to arrange the importation of vehicles via Santo Domingo .
It appears that the customs in Santo Domingo had already requested a letter from the shippers Toyota confirming that all the cargo was to be transhipped to the Turks and Caicos .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d The principle of Delta was a Mr Peynado , a former President of the Dominican Republic .
Mr Aquino left Santo Domingo and on arriving back in the Turks and Caicos , sent the following fax to Toyota : - \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cFollowing is an update on vehicles missing in Santa Domingo .
Toyota complained that Mr Aquino had left Santo Domingo without meeting with the Customs .
Fooks v Smith -LSB- 1924 -RSB- 2 KB 505 , Anderson v Marten -LSB- 1908 -RSB- AC 334 and generally Arnold \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Law of Marine Insurance 16th ed .
Seizure It was the defendants \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 pleaded case that the vehicles had been \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cconfiscated \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d by the Dominican Customs Authorities , by virtue of the fact that , in contravention of Dominican law , the same had not been declared for transhipment at the loading ports of Yokohama and Nagoya \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cand/or were not shipped within 60 or alternatively 75 , days of being discharged from the relevant carrying vessel .
\ n The classic definition of seizure is to be found in the speech of Lord Fitzgerald in Cory v. Burr -LRB- 1883 -RRB- 8 App.Cas .
Robinson Gold Mining v. Alliance Insurance -LSB- 1904 -RSB- AC 359 , Lozano v. Janson -LRB- 1859 -RRB- 2 E & E 160 , Powell v. Hyde -LRB- 1855 -RRB- 2 E & E 160 .
Kleinwort v. Shepherd -LRB- 1859 -RRB- 1 E&E 441 , Johnson v. Hogg -LRB- 1883 -RRB- 10 QBD 432 .
b ` Mr Justice Langley : INTRODUCTION The Claimant , a Swedish company , -LRB- `` BIM '' -RRB- , and the Defendant , an English company , -LRB- `` Blackburn '' -RRB- , both manufacture and supply chemicals for use in the pulp and paper industries .
The principals and founders of the companies concerned at the relevant times were Mr Peter Wallberg -LRB- Bim -RRB- and Mr George Lamb -LRB- Blackburn -RRB- .
\ r Between 1984 and late 1998 BIM and Blackburn worked together in the promotion and sale of each other \ 's products in Scandinavia -LRB- Bim -RRB- and the United Kingdom -LRB- Blackburn -RRB- .
Bim issued proceedings in July 1999 claiming two years loss of profit on sales of BS 470 on the basis that under an agreement allegedly made in 1994 on the terms of a fax from Blackburn to Bim dated 20 December 1993 -LRB- `` the December 1993 fax '' -RRB- Blackburn was obliged to give a year \ 's notice from the anniversary of the agreement before it could terminate supplies of BS 470 to Bim .
Blackburn denies that any such agreement was made and also asserts that even if it was made Bim was in repudiatory breach of it because Bim wrongfully sold its own -LRB- or Cellkem \ 's -RRB- products in Scandinavia .
In particular all issues involving the quantification of the claims and cross-claims and Blackburn \ 's claim that if the 1994 agreement was made it was unlawful by reason of infringement of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 and/or the Treaty of Rome , are excluded from this trial .
The witnesses for Bim were Mr Wallberg , Mr Larsson , Mr Johansson , Mrs Nordhammer , Mr Hassellof , Mr Rannankari , Mr Mutka and Mr Mattila .
In his closing submissions Mr Turner submitted that Mr Wallberg was `` an evasive and unreliable witness '' .
\ r The witnesses for Blackburn were Mr George Lamb , Mr Phillip Tait , Mr Steven Lamb , Mr Roope Maijala , Mr Stephen Clark , Dr Jack Bratt , Mr John Covill and Mrs Amanda Holt .
\ r Mr George Lamb founded Blackburn also in 1973 .
\ r Mr Tait \ 's departure had left a gap in the senior management of Blackburn which Mr George Lamb filled at least until January 1997 when Mr Lamb \ 's third son , Steven Lamb , who was then Factory Manager , was appointed General Manager .
It is , however , some indication of the continuing influence of Mr George Lamb that Mr Steven Lamb was not even aware of the December 1993 fax , let alone that Mr Wallberg had initialled it , before these proceedings started .
Again I think Mr Steven Lamb was a truthful witness albeit , like others who gave evidence for Blackburn , somewhat inhibited by the views of his father .
Mr Stephen Clark is and was Sales Manager of Blackburn .
Dr Bratt is a chemist and has been Technical Director of Blackburn since June 1975 .
\ r THE 1984 AGREEMENT By a written Agreement dated 29 May 1984 -LRB- `` the 1984 Agreement '' -RRB- Blackburn agreed to supply Bim with antifoam chemicals -LRB- under Blackburn \ 's trade name `` Dispelair '' -RRB- and granted Bim an exclusive licence to use Blackburn \ 's know-how in the manufacture marketing and selling of anti-foaming agents in Sweden , Norway , Denmark and Finland -LRB- `` the territory '' -RRB- .
\ r By Clause 12 Blackburn had the right to terminate the agreement by notice forthwith if any sum due was unpaid for 31 days or Bim became insolvent -LRB- or the like -RRB- or if Bim committed `` a breach of any of the agreements herein on its part to be performed or observed and '' should `` fail to remedy the same within fourteen days after being requested so to do '' .
\ r In May 1989 Bim agreed to supply Blackburn with one of its own products for distribution in the United Kingdom .
The agreement was the subject of a letter from Mr Larsson to Mr George Lamb which simply recorded a telephone agreement that Blackburn `` will have the right to act as our distributor in the UK '' and offered `` to sign a distributor contract any time you want '' while also expressing the hope that `` this piece of paper has a certain validity in the meantime '' .
\ r THE DECEMBER 1993 FAX The December 1993 fax provided that the 1984 Agreement would remain in force with respect to `` old '' products and gave exclusive sales rights for both Blackburn for Bim \ 's products in the United Kingdom and for Bim for Blackburn \ 's products in Sweden and for -LRB- at least -RRB- 3 years in Denmark , Norway and Finland .
\ r The December 1993 fax was sent by Mr Tait to Mr Wallberg and Mr Larsson .
Mr George Lamb had written to Mr Wallberg telling him about Mr Tait \ 's appointment , the intention that Mr Tait should take over from Mr Lamb when Mr Lamb retired , and Mr Tait \ 's `` special responsibility '' for activities in Bim \ 's area .
Mr Wallberg visited Blackburn in the first week of November 1993 and met Mr Tait and Mr George Lamb and others .
Following the meeting Mr Tait wrote to Mr Wallberg referring to `` significant progress '' in their discussions and enquiring when he could come to Sweden `` to finalise matters '' .
Mr Tait met Mr Wallberg and Mr Larsson in Sweden on 24 November .
\ r The December 1993 fax opened with a reference to the discussion Mr Tait had had at Mr Wallberg \ 's home in Sweden and continued : \ r `` I have detailed below the basic points of our proposed new agreement for your information .
THE MARCH 1994 CONVERSATION The fax produced no response from Bim for some weeks -LRB- partly at least because Mr Wallberg suffered an accident in the interim -RRB- but on 9 March 1994 Mr Tait raised the matter with Mr Wallberg in a telephone conversation .
This note was signed `` Peter '' with the date 9 March 1994 and on the same day copies of the December 1993 fax with the note on it were sent by Mr Wallberg \ 's secretary to Mr Larsson and Birgitta Petersson -LRB- an Accountant at Bim -RRB- for information .
\ r The pricing of BS 470 was the subject of a further conversation between Mr Tait and Mr Wallberg reflected in a fax from Mr Tait dated 30 March 1994 .
\ r On 29 July 1994 Mr Tait sent a fax addressed to Mr Wallberg which read : \ r `` Late last year and earlier this year we both made substantial progress in moving towards a commercial agreement which was intended to facilitate mutual growth for both companies .
Mr Wallberg wrote on this fax for the attention of his secretary `` reply to his fax and tell him we can discuss this when we meet in England '' .
That fax was seen by Mr George Lamb who copied it to Mr Tait with the comment that Mr Lamb had not replied to it .
\ r The Bim sales team was meeting in London at the end of August and a visit was arranged to Blackburn on 31 August which included `` discussions with the objectives of how we can increase the sales of each others products '' held in the afternoon followed by a memorable evening out in Preston .
Mr Clark and Mr George Lamb , Dr Bratt and others -LRB- but not Mr Tait -RRB- were present for Blackburn .
Mr Tait was in Australia .
\ r Mr George Lamb wrote a memo for Mr Tait on the Bim visit dated 7 September 1994 .
Decide on Bim products to be marketed by us ... '' Sent or not it is of some significance that Mr George Lamb was plainly happy for Mr Wallberg to see this memo with its instruction to Mr Tait to finalise the new agreement .
\ r THE OCTOBER 1994 MEETING On October 11 and 12 1994 , Mr Tait and Mr Clark visited Bim Kemi in Gothenberg for discussions about trading between the two companies .
In the course of those meetings -LRB- which were held with Mr Larsson , Mrs Nordhammer and Mr Johansson -RRB- and probably towards their conclusion and at Mr Tait \ 's instigation because Mr Tait wanted to discuss the agreement , Mr Wallberg came into the meeting briefly .
Whilst there he placed his initials on a copy of the December 1993 fax which Mr Tait had brought with him from Blackburn .
Mr Tait returned to Blackburn with the initialled copy .
\ r At the meetings on 11 and 12 October it is not in dispute , and is demonstrated by some notes made by Mr Clark , that Mr Larsson spoke about Bim \ 's business operation , including its structure , mentioning the presence of two sales people in Finland , and also referring to Bim focusing on Germany and Canada and other parts of the world .
\ r In a further note prepared by Mr Clark and initialled by Mr Tait there are two references to agreements .
\ r BIM \ 'S ACQUISITION OF CELLKEM At about midnight on 31 December 1994 , having been alerted to the prospect early in the year and begun negotiations in the summer of 1994 , and without prior mention to Blackburn , Bim entered into an agreement to acquire from a holding company through a Finnish company formed for the purpose and subsequently named Cellkem Oy , the business , assets and liabilities of a company known as Cellpap Oy .
`` Cellkem '' manufactured and sold its own range of anti-foaming agents under the brand names Tensidef and Prodex both in Scandinavia and the United Kingdom .
Bim recognised rightly that this acquisition would cause concern to Blackburn in the context of the existing arrangements between Bim and Blackburn .
\ r Following completion of the acquisition Mr Wallberg informed Mr George Lamb about it on the telephone .
Mr Lamb asked Mr Wallberg to write to Mr Tait on the subject which Mr Wallberg duly did on 2 February 1995 .
Mr Wallberg said -LRB- as did Mr Larsson -RRB- and I accept , that Bim had in mind in particular the sale of BS 470 in Finland as pulp-manufacturers moved from oil-based to silicone-based anti-foaming agents .
\ r Mr Tait and Mr Clark were due to meet Bim Kemi in Amsterdam on 6 February .
On 2 February Mr Tait sent Mr Larsson a proposed agenda for the meeting .
\ r Mr Tait -LRB- with Mr Clark -RRB- did meet Mr Wallberg -LRB- and others from Bim -RRB- in Amsterdam on 6 February .
Mr Tait returned to London the next day and discussed the meeting with Mr George Lamb and Dr Bratt .
The draft expressed pleasure at the acquisition and anticipation of a substantial expansion of Dispelair sales in Finland and continued in uncompleted form : \ r `` We realise that this does violate our original agreement , which incidentally is the only signed agreement , providing that Blackburn does benefit from a substant ... .
In the event on 9 February Mr Tait wrote to Mr Wallberg to thank him for his letter of 2 February and continued : \ r `` We are very pleased with your success in acquiring such a strategically important company which has an interesting portfolio of products .
But there was a telephone conversation between Mr Tait and Mr Larsson on 27 February to which Mr Tait referred in a fax sent to Mr Larsson that day .
It would appear that Cellkem is being left to run the business as it was before your take-over of them '' Mr Tait continued by asking specific questions about the sale of Cellkem \ 's products in the United Kingdom and asking for full details of Cellkem \ 's range of anti-foaming agents .
The cause of his concern was sales by Cellkem of products -LRB- not anti-foaming agents -RRB- in the United Kingdom of which Blackburn was unaware .
There was no follow-up to this fax , but the documents and evidence show that sales by Cellkem in the United Kingdom were not a subject of complaint by Blackburn thereafter .
\ r Mr Larsson said , and I accept , that once it was agreed , as it was , that BS 470 should be sold through Cellkem in Finland , Cellkem dropped its development of its own silicone-based product .
Mr Tait left Blackburn in December 1995 .
The original draft letter -LRB- paragraph 42 -RRB- captured the substance of what had been said by Bim , namely that Blackburn would benefit from an increase of sales in Finland as BS 470 came to replace Cellkem \ 's oil-based products .
\ r It is also , I think , apparent -LRB- despite his attempts to offer alternative possibilities in cross-examination -RRB- that Mr Tait came away from the Amsterdam meeting in the belief that the 1994 agreement was effective for sales both of Blackburn \ 's `` new '' products by Bim and Bim \ 's products by Blackburn -LRB- to which , apart from Aquamol , only the 1994 agreement could apply -RRB- .
Mr Tait sent two faxes to Mr Larsson on 8 February 1995 which can only sensibly be explained on that basis .
Mr Philip Lamb -LRB- another son of Mr George Lamb and then Blackburn \ 's Company Secretary -RRB- wrote to Mr Larsson on the subject .
Mr Lamb stated that Bim had not supplied invoices to enable the correct price to be established but from a list of sales Bim had provided it appeared that an adjustment was due in Blackburn \ 's favour against `` the initial price '' of \ xc2 \ xa31285 pmt at which Blackburn had continued to invoice .
It was this proposal that was agreed at a review meeting held with Mr Clark in Sweden on 24 April .
Mr Clark reported on this agreement -LRB- and the meeting generally -RRB- to Mr George Lamb -LRB- and others -RRB- at Blackburn in a memorandum dated 30 April .
\ r BIM \ 'S CONCERNS Mr Wallberg and Mr George Lamb met at Mr Wallberg \ 's summer house in Sweden in June 1996 .
They discussed what was referred to as the `` new arrangement '' and Mr Wallberg \ 's concern that it was not as good for Bim as Blackburn because Bim was increasing sales of Blackburn anti-foaming agents but Blackburn was not increasing sales of Bim \ 's products .
\ r Belatedly , because of bereavement , Mr Wallberg responded in a letter to Mr George Lamb dated 4 October .
Mr Wallberg provided sales figures for anti-foaming agents split into sales of products under the 1984 agreement , resale of Blackburn \ 's products -LRB- that is sales of BS 470 -RRB- and sales of Cellkem products .
Mr Wallberg also referred expressly to the problem of paying a royalty under the 1984 agreement for old products even though Bim had been forced to use its own resources to up-grade them ; to the fact that `` all new products now go under a new agreement where we have lower profit '' which was demotivating for Bim \ 's sales force ; and to Blackburn \ 's lack of success in selling Bim \ 's products .
\ r Mr Clark analysed the sales figures provided by Mr Wallberg .
The minutes of the meeting and the oral evidence from Mr Wallberg and Mr Larsson about the meeting are not entirely clear or consistent but the substance of the discussion is I think sufficiently established especially when seen in the context of the termination letter sent some 2 \ xc2 \ xbd months later at the end of May .
\ r It was at this time that Mr Steven Lamb was appointed General Manager of Blackburn and on 22 April Mr George Lamb informed Mr Wallberg of the appointment and the intention that he should become Managing Director when Mr George Lamb reached 65 .
\ r On 27 May 1997 , following a Board Meeting held on 16 May , Mr Larsson wrote to Steven Lamb sending what was described as a `` Notice of termination of Licence Agreement dated 29th of May 1984 '' which stated : \ r `` We have discussed at several meetings the complex a -LRB- nd -RRB- unsatisfied situation with the different agreements between the companies .
Mr Steven Lamb did so in a letter to Mr Larsson dated 20 June and Mr George Lamb in a letter to Mr Wallberg dated 7 July .
\ r A Minute of Bim Kemi \ 's Board Meeting held on 16 June reveals Bim Kemi \ 's strategy to be to `` pass the ball over '' to Blackburn , `` complete the development of our own products '' and `` even if the business connection is now severed Bim will if possible be the salespersons \ ' preferred purchaser '' .
\ r BLACKBURN AND CLARIANT/CHEMEC By 16 September 1997 it is apparent that Blackburn had already established a relationship with another Finnish company -LRB- Clariant Finland -RRB- and the agent of Clariant , Oy Chemec , with a view to those companies selling Blackburn \ 's products .
Indeed on 24 June 1997 Blackburn had sold 20 tonnes of BS 470 to Clariant .
Clariant and Chemec also provided Blackburn with information about the Scandinavian market and about what Bim was supposedly doing in it .
Thus on 16 September Clariant wrote to Blackburn that `` Bim/Cellkem '' had moved from Dispelair to Tensidef in many places but it was not known if it was only a change of name because in the case of Dispelair 150 -LRB- which was manufactured and sold by Bim subject to the 1984 Agreement -RRB- Cellkem was saying that Tensidef 520 was the same product .
No one at Blackburn took the matter up with Bim , although Mr Steven Lamb also met Mr Larsson in Munich on 16 September .
The marketing of Blackburn products under the Tensidef name and other unspecified action by Bim was said to be `` clearly against the agreement , therefore effectively cancelling it '' .
A joint venture with Bim , as Mr Larsson had proposed to Mr Steven Lamb at the meeting in Munich , was not considered to be worth pursuing as Blackburn would be `` most uncomfortable '' in forming such a venture but a dialogue was to be maintained `` so as not to show our hand too early '' .
The action plan included Dr Bratt devoting a full week in October to a project to `` match '' Bim \ 's Aquamol product and Mr Steven Lamb and Mr Clark visiting Chemec .
Chemec was arranging trials of BS 470 in Finland and Blackburn noted that pending a further meeting with Chemec and Clariant `` BS 470 and paper-stock antifoams will continue to be supplied to Chemec via Clariant '' .
Blackburn sold BS 470 to Clariant as `` Antimussol PWB '' .
Thereafter regular sales of at least 20 tonnes a month of BS 470 were made by Blackburn to Clariant .
\ r In about October 1998 Bim appointed a Mr John Westwood to promote sales of Bim products in the United Kingdom .
Blackburn was informed of the appointment and Mr Westwood met Mr Clark to discuss how Mr Westwood envisaged he and Blackburn were to co-operate to that end .
\ r BLACKBURN END SUPPLIES OF BS 470 TO BIM The immediate trigger for Blackburn refusing to make further supplies of BS 470 to Bim seems to have been a report from Mr Roope Maijala of Chemec to Mr Clark dated 7 December 1998 .
\ r On 21 December , Steven Lamb wrote to Mr Mikko Maijala stating that Mr Maijala was `` well aware of the problems we have encountered with Bim Kemi/Cellkem with regard to them breaking our agreement time and time again .
\ r The letter continued by stating that Blackburn had decided to stop supplying Bim `` with any of our pulp defoamers '' ; and looked forward to working closely with Chemec in Finland and the rest of Scandinavia having built up extra stocks to enable Chemec to ensure continuity of supply .
Mrs Nordhammer had spoken to Mr Larsson who had himself spoken to Steven Lamb .
Mrs Nordhammer sent a fax for Steven Lamb \ 's attention saying she did not understand what Mr Larsson had reported to her about their conversation and asking whether it was still possible to place orders with Blackburn and would Blackburn supply existing and future orders .
They are : \ r -LRB- 1 -RRB- Whether or not a binding contract was made in 1994 in the terms -LRB- later varied as to price -RRB- of the December 1993 fax for the exclusive supply to Bim by Blackburn of BS 470 for sale in Scandinavia ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- Was Bim in breach of that contract and/or the earlier 1984 Agreement by reason in particular of its -LRB- or Cellkem \ 's -RRB- sales of Tensidef products in Scandinavia between 1995 and 1998 ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- If Bim was in breach were the breaches repudiatory .
Amongst those issues related to the first issue , Blackburn asserts that Mr Tait -LRB- if he made any agreement with Bim -RRB- had no authority to do so ; that any agreement was not intended to be legally binding ; that the terms were uncertain ; that it has been rescinded for misrepresentation ; and that 20 % of the available market was not achieved .
On the second issue Blackburn also alleges failures by Bim to provide sales information ; the appointment of Mr Westwood ; and failures to use best endeavours to promote sales of Blackburn products .
If it did not , there is an issue whether the end date for a claim by Bim would be 1 January 2000 or , -LRB- on the basis that , as Mr Onslow submits , Bim did not accept Blackburn \ 's repudiation of the agreement until 17 August 1999 when it served its Points of Claim -RRB- 1 January 2001 as the earliest date thereafter on which Blackburn could have terminated the agreement in accordance with its terms .
\ r Bim wanted new and improved products to maintain its market share -LRB- especially in Sweden at the time -RRB- and wanted Blackburn to work harder to promote the sale of Bim \ 's products in the United Kingdom .
It was Blackburn which drafted the December 1993 fax and , on the evidence , Mr George Lamb was personally and plainly very much involved in doing so .
There is a revealing note of a discussion in a sauna held in March 1992 at which Dr Bratt and Mr Larsson were present which states `` no-one does anything at Blackburn without George approving it '' .
Having seen George Lamb give evidence and as Dr Bratt confirmed I have no doubt at all that was accurate and remained accurate at all times material to this dispute .
I accept Mr Wallberg \ 's evidence that in Sweden a `` gentleman \ 's agreement '' means an effective -LRB- or binding -RRB- agreement but one which will not be drafted or finalised by lawyers .
But I also accept Mr Tait \ 's evidence that he took the words in the sense in which they are -LRB- and were -RRB- commonly used in England as an agreement binding in honour only and to be contrasted with a legally binding agreement .
Mr Tait had a clear recollection of Mr Wallberg using the expression and that when Mr Tait reported it to Mr George Lamb and Dr Bratt it was met with ironic laughter .
Thus , as I find , Bim believed the terms of the fax were agreed and binding ; Blackburn believed they were agreed but not binding .
\ r The October meeting , however , in my judgment and as I find , achieved the finality which Blackburn sought and Mr George Lamb had asked Mr Tait to achieve .
Although there are differences in the evidence as to the precise chain of events again I think the substance of what occurred is sufficiently clear and accords both with the indisputable fact that Mr Wallberg initialled the December 1993 fax and the fact that Mr Clark referred to a new agreement in his notes .
It was also the evidence of Mrs Nordhammer and Mr Larsson -LRB- which I accept as a clear and accurate recollection -RRB- that Mr Tait was obviously delighted by the fact that Mr Wallberg had initialled the fax .
The further indisputable facts that Mr Tait had the fax with him , it was that copy -LRB- alone -RRB- which was initialled , and that Mr Wallberg was asked to come to the meeting to deal with the agreement , also satisfy me that Mr Tait must have at least in effect asked Mr Wallberg to sign the fax .
Both Mr Tait and Mr Clark suggested that it all happened quickly if not brusquely .
But their impression is consistent with Mr Wallberg \ 's belief that he was doing no more than he had already agreed in the March 1994 conversation and also with Mr Tait \ 's belief that a binding agreement was not yet in place because only a gentleman \ 's agreement had been made in March .
The lack of follow-up in that period supports the conclusion that Blackburn and in particular Mr Tait and Mr George Lamb , were pleased and content with what they had got .
\ r WAS THE AGREEMENT OTHERWISE EFFECTIVE In addressing this question I propose to consider the points made by Mr Turner in his written Closing Arguments on which Blackburn relies to impugn the 1994 Agreement , assuming , as I have held , that such an Agreement was made on the terms of the December 1993 fax .
\ r NO AUTHORITY \ t. \ tMr Tait agreed that both he and Mr George Lamb wanted Mr Wallberg to agree to the terms of the December 1993 fax .
I am entirely satisfied that at all times Mr Tait had Mr George Lamb \ 's express authority to obtain -LRB- if he could -RRB- that agreement .
In each of the three countries -LRB- Denmark , Norway and Finland -RRB- Bim has exclusive sales rights for 3 years from 1 January 1994 .
The substance of the misrepresentation and mistake relied upon is that at the October 1994 meeting Mr Larsson implicitly represented that Bim had no plans to acquire a business competing with Blackburn \ 's business and that representation was false because the acquisition of what became Cellkem was then under consideration .
For good commercial reasons -LRB- potential sales of BS 470 to Cellkem customers in Finland -RRB- Blackburn chose to accept the position and has benefitted substantially as a result .
\ r Although Blackburn was aware in 1997 of sales of Tensidef 520 in place of DP 150 and of doubts as to whether they were the same product -LRB- paragraph 65 -RRB- but did not pursue the matter , I agree with Mr Turner that the evidence does not establish the elements necessary for waiver or estoppel .
\ r Sales by Cellkem in the U.K. Whatever the rights of Blackburn under the December 1993 fax in relation to sales of Cellkem \ 's products in the United Kingdom -LRB- which would depend on the product in question -RRB- Blackburn was aware that Cellkem was continuing to make such sales -LRB- paragraph 46 -RRB- , that Bim was concerned at Blackburn \ 's lack of success in selling in the U.K. -LRB- paragraphs 54 and 55 -RRB- and of Mr Westwood \ 's appointment -LRB- paragraph 69 -RRB- .
\ r -LRB- 4 -RRB- BREACHES BY BLACKBURN The sales of BS 470 made by Blackburn to Clariant and Chemec -LRB- paragraphs 65 to 68 -RRB- were , granted my finding that Bim/Cellkem had achieved 20 % of the available market in Finland by the end of 1996 , plainly breaches of the exclusive sales rights granted to Bim in the 1994 Agreement .
But the essence of the Agreement was exclusivity of sales rights -LRB- and the related obligation only to source products from the other party -RRB- and Bim \ 's opportunity to retain such rights in Denmark , Norway and Finland if it attained 20 % of the market .
In commercial terms Bim wanted to sell BS 470 and Blackburn wanted Bim to sell as much as possible .
Indeed Mr Tait in his evidence acknowledged the obligation on Blackburn for which Mr Onslow contends .
Mr Turner also rightly accepted that if -LRB- as I have decided -RRB- Blackburn \ 's refusal to make further supplies was a breach of the Agreement it was a repudiatory breach .
\ r Mr Onslow submits that until Bim accepted Blackburn \ 's repudiation of the Agreement in August 1999 the Agreement remained in force and because at that date it could only have been properly terminated by a notice expiring on 31 December 2000 damages are to be assessed up to the end of 2000 .
This , submitted Mr Turner , encouraged and allowed Blackburn to believe that the parties would no longer be working together after 29 May 1999 .
As a matter of general principle I think damages should be assessed on the assumption that Blackburn would have conducted itself so as to limit its obligations under the Agreement to the minimum : see McGregor on Damages , 16th Edition , paras 386 to 388 .
\ n On 9 th May 1998 the Mass Glory completed loading a cargo of soyapellets at Rio Grande and shortly afterwards Glencore declared Xiamen in the People \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Republic of China as the first discharging port .
Discharge of that part of the cargo destined for Xiamen was completed on 19 th August and the vessel then left for Nantong to discharge the remainder .
\ n On behalf of Glencore Miss Healy submitted that the Mass Glory was fully at the charterers \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 disposal from the moment she passed the inward inspection at Xiamen , even though she was not at a berth .
v Roplak Enterprises -LRB- The \ xe2 \ x80 \ x98World Navigator \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 -RRB- -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 23 and upon a passage in Commencement of Laytime -LRB- 3 rd ed. , 1998 -RRB- by the well known maritime arbitrator , Mr. Donald Davies .
The practical effect of this submission , as Miss Healy recognised , would be to apply the laytime code from the time the vessel reached Xiamen , even though she was not then technically an arrived ship .
\ n Miss Healy \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s alternative submission was that the arbitrators erred in holding that laytime began to run when the vessel commenced discharging at Xiamen .
\ n In support of her argument Miss Healy drew my attention to the final paragraph of the judgment of Sir Gordon Willmer in The Delian Spirit at page 127C-D in which he expressly left open the question whether the owners would have been able to pursue an independent claim for damages without taking account of the laytime provisions if the vessel had not been an arrived ship .
\ n Miss Healy also drew my attention to a passage in Commencement of Laytime -LRB- 3 rd ed. , 1998 -RRB- by Mr. Donald Davies at pages 130-131 in which the author suggests that when a vessel is waiting at or off a port it should be unnecessary to decide whether she is technically an arrived ship because it is illogical and unfair to set laytime off against delay caused by the charterers \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 breach of contract if the vessel is anchored a short distance within the port limits but not to do so if she is anchored a short distance outside them .
\ n Finally Miss Healy sought to derive support from the decision of the Court of Appeal in Kurt A. Becher G.m.b.H .
\ n In The Mexico 1 the vessel was chartered for the carriage of a part cargo of maize in bags from Argentina to Angola .
By a separate agreement with the same charterers the owners also agreed to carry a parcel of beans from Argentina to Angola .
\ n In The Agamemnon the vessel was chartered for a voyage from Baton Rouge to Brisbane with a cargo of steel pipes .
This is a customary waiting area for vessels wishing to enter the Mississippi to load at one of the upriver ports , but is not within the area of the port of Baton Rouge which is some 170 miles away .
The vessel entered the Mississippi the next day and proceeded to the anchorage at Baton Rouge where she waited for a berth .
The case of Barrett Brothers -LRB- Taxis -RRB- Ltd v Davies -LSB- 1966 -RSB- 1 W.L.R .
in The Mexico 1 in the passage at page 510 to which I referred earlier , in the decision of Diplock J. in Pteroti v National Coal Board and in the decision of Langley J. in The Happy Day , a decision on the same charter form .
Stargas sub-chartered the vessel to Neste for the carriage of a cargo of propylene from Sines to Antwerp .
Clarke J. held that Petredec was in breach of its obligation under the time charter , that its breach caused Stargas to be in breach of a similar obligation under the voyage charter and that the damages for that breach were to be measured by the amount Stargas had been ordered to pay Neste together with the costs incurred in defending the claim .
Clarke J. also drew attention to the problem of remoteness when discussing the case of Gr \ xc3 \ xa9bert-Borgnis v J .
The 22nd defendant , HBA Ltd , represents Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Underwriters and is domiciled in England .
It is alleged that the policy insured the claimants in respect of various parcels of vegetable oil held in storage in India subject to the management of ITS Caleb Brett -LRB- Canada -RRB- Ltd and/or its Indian Subsidiary -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cITS \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- pursuant to a Collateral Management Agreement -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cCMA \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- dated 23 July 1999 between ITS and the Claimant .
\ n On 19 May 1999 by a letter of intent the claimant agreed with Lanyard Foods Ltd of India -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cLanyard \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- that Lanyard and/or Shweta International Pte Ltd of Singapore , -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cShweta \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- would purchase from the claimant quantities of vegetable oil to be shipped to India by the claimant .
\ n -LRB- 1 -RRB- \ ta minimum of 15,000 mts vegetable oils would be purchased by Lanyard each month commencing in June 1999 and shipped to India by the claimant ; and -LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tthe cargoes of vegetable oil would be stored in India pending payment of a provisional price calculated by reference to a premium above the Chicago Board of Trade futures price for the commodity concerned together with the cost of freight , whereupon the oil would be released to Lanyard ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tLanyard would arrange and pay for tank storage space in India ; -LRB- 4 -RRB- \ tthe cargoes of oil in storage pending payment by or on behalf of Lanyard and/or Shweta would be managed by ITS under a collateral management agreement -LRB- in the event , the CMA between the claimant and ITS referred to above -RRB- .
It is said that Lanyard entered into tank storage lease agreements in respect of tanks located at Mumbai , Mangalore and Kandla and then sub-let the tanks to ITS .
\ n In the course of 1999 to June 2000 the claimant shipped vegetable oils to Lanyard and/or Shweta in India pursuant to various sale contracts .
\ n In July 2000 Lanyard started proceedings in the High Court in Mumbai seeking to obtain delivery of the remaining oil in storage at Mumbai without first having paid the claimant .
It is said that in view of what had already happened with regard to the other oil stored at Mumbai and Mangalore , the claimants , in order to avert or minimise further losses , entered into an agreement with Lanyard and Shweta under which the claimants would release to those buyers small parcels of the oil remaining in storage against payment of the current market price as distinct from the provisional contract price .
The application of Article 12a 4 has been considered by the Court of Appeal in John Robert Charman and Mark E Brockbank v. WOC Offshore BV -LSB- 1993 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep 551 .
Accordingly , it is necessary to investigate how the German courts would answer the question whether the scope of the obligation imposed by clause 5.3.2 is such as to extend to proceedings outside Germany , for example where the proviso to the Hamburg jurisdiction clause indicates that claims should be brought in the English courts .
\ n Accordingly , as a matter of German law , if , as I have concluded , the claimants were not bound to commence proceedings in Germany in particular in Hamburg , they were not confined to proceedings only against the leading underwriter .
That argument is addressed by reference to English law principles of construction , in particular those express by Lord Hoffman in Investors Compensation Scheme v. West Bromwich Building Society -LSB- 1998 -RSB- 1 WLR 896 .
Thus , SIAT , the leading underwriter , can be sued only in Italy and the only defendant underwriter that can be sued in the English courts is the 22nd defendant , that being the only defendant domiciled in England .
Until recently he owned a house in Australia , but over the past few years he has lived in various countries including Dubai , Greece and latterly the United Kingdom .
In May 2000 Mr. Angelou began proceedings in the First Court of Piraeus against Mr. Aoun which led to the filing by Mr. Aoun on 14 th June 2000 of a pleading in which he gave his address as Beirut , Lebanon .
Clyde & Co. responded by saying that Mr. Aoun lived in Athens , not Beirut , but that they would take his instructions .
\ r Incorrect address given in the claim form It is convenient to begin with the defendants \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 contention that the address given for Mr. Aoun in the claim form , 112 Agiou Nikolaou Street , Glyfada , Athens , was incorrect .
-LRB- whose submissions on this issue were adopted by Mr. Davies -RRB- submitted that Mr. Aoun \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s evidence concerning his address in Athens at and around the time of the issue of the claim form was wholly unsatisfactory and that in the absence of any more reliable evidence I should find that he had left the address in Agiou Nikolaou Street during January 2000 as his first witness statement implied .
He said that he had lived in Australia until 1992 when he moved to Geneva .
He said that from then on he had lived in Greece until he and his family moved to London in early December 2000 .
He pointed out , among other things , that Mr. Aoun had been in Athens on several occasions prior to 1999 and that in 1997 he had given an address in Beirut to the Lebanese police rather than an address in Dubai .
His statement that he entered Greece for the first time in 1999 -LRB- another apparent discrepancy relied on by Mr. Dunning -RRB- was made in the context of dealing with his permanent residence , not relatively brief visits for business or other reasons .
\ r In a second witness statement Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Aoun responded to Mr. Dickinson by giving the various addresses at which he said he had resided in Greece from February 1999 .
On the contrary , all his connections were with Greece , the Middle East -LRB- in particular Lebanon and Dubai -RRB- and Australia .
He accepted that those particular objectives could have been achieved by moving back to Australia , but he said that he wished to remain in Europe in order to be able to build up his business interests without having to overcome the difficulties posed by a substantial time difference and in order to be able to give his personal attention to the present proceedings .
Despite all the unsatisfactory aspects of Mr. Aoun \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s evidence about his address in Greece at any given time , it seems reasonably clear that he was living in Athens in the autumn of 2000 , although his wife and children returned to Australia at some time during the latter part of the year .
Mr. Jacobs submitted that since Greece is a Brussels Convention country , Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Aoun , as his solicitors must have been aware , was no better off coming to London than he would have been staying in Athens .
Mr. Aoun said in evidence that his wife and children had returned to Australia towards the end of 2000 and had lived with her brother for a time because their own house had been let , but he did not say that they had left Greece in a hurry or that they had gone to Australia as a temporary measure because they had nowhere else to go .
This is a question of construction that was touched on by Park J. in Chandler v Brown -LRB- unreported 20 th July 2001 -RRB- but left open for decision on another occasion .
\ r It was common ground that the test for \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cordinary residence \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d in this country is whether the person concerned is habitually and normally resident here , apart from temporary or occasional absences of long or short duration : see R v Barnet London Borough Council ex parte Shah -LSB- 1983 -RSB- 2 AC 309 .
\ r However , Mr. Davies -LRB- whose argument on this issue was adopted by Mr. Dunning -RRB- submitted that Mr. Aoun can not be regarded as ordinarily resident for the purposes of rule 25.13 -LRB- a -RRB- because he is not here lawfully .
In 1993 he obtained a degree in Economics from University College , London .
See Standard Chartered Bank \ xe2 \ x80 \ x93v - Pakistan National Shipping Corporation -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Reports 218 Court of Appeal , Noel - v - Poland , 14 June 2001 , unreported , Toulson J and Daido Asia Japan Co Ltd - v - Rothen , 24 July 2001 , unreported , Lawrence Collins J. Happily I do not need to add to the debate , although CSFB has reserved the right to argue elsewhere if necessary that on this aspect the decision in Standard Chartered Bank is wrong and moreover need not be followed by a court of either inferior or co-ordinate jurisdiction .
CSFB alleges that the Defendant dishonestly procured Hayford to represent to CSFB that it CSFB had also agreed on Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s behalf on 31 March to sell 10,000 Ariba shares at a price of US$ 230 , thereby creating matching transactions which would yield a profit to Hayford .
The Defendant recognises that in the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Standard Chartered Bank Ltd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x93v - Pakistan National Shipping Corporation -LRB- No. 4 -RRB- -LSB- 2001 -RSB- QB 167 he can not hope before me to secure a reduction in damages pursuant to the Act , but he asks me to make relevant findings as to the appropriate apportionment in the light of the fact that leave to appeal against the decision of the Court of Appeal was given by the House of Lords on 7 June 2001 .
Before CSFB would open an account for Hayford the Defendant , who had in the second half of 1999 unsuccessfully applied for a job on the US Institutional Desk of CSFBEL , was required to complete an Investor Classification Questionnaire and to furnish further information relevant to his status as an expert investor .
A Mr Jamil Marmarchi of Merrill Lynch International Bank , who gave evidence at the trial , provided a letter dated 22 December 1999 in these terms : - \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cI would like to advise that Mr Faris Rawi has been classified at Merrill Lynch as a Expert Investor under \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cSFA Client Class \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d due to his experience with the financial markets , his educational background and his investment risk criteria .
It is said by the Defendant that at all times and on all occasions material to this action Hayford was in fact acting for and on behalf of Belgrave Group Ltd to which I will refer hereafter as \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cBelgrave , \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d an entity incorporated on 5 November 1999 in the British Virgin Islands as an International Business Company .
I turn next to the arrangements with Belgrave and with SG Hambros Bank and Trust -LRB- Guernsey -RRB- Ltd , to which I will refer hereafter as \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cHambros , \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d observing that it was not until 28 February 2000 that CSFB opened an account with Hayford through which Hayford then began to trade .
In relation to Belgrave the \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9csettlor \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d was said in this correspondence to be a Mr Arfan Abdulla , born on 1 January 1949 and resident in Amman , Jordan .
\ n Meanwhile , on 22 November 1999 , Hayford and Belgrave entered into an agreement pursuant to which Hayford agreed , as and when requested by Belgrave , to advise on investment opportunities and to provide a best effort market execution service in fixed income securities , equities and other financial instruments .
It was agreed for the avoidance of doubt that Hayford had no power to commit Belgrave or to act as its agent and that no decision to transact or to execute would be made by Hayford .
Belgrave agreed to pay Hayford all of its expenses plus 10 % , to ratify all that Hayford lawfully did in the performance of its duties under the agreement and to indemnify Hayford against demands and damages and other liabilities whatsoever arising out of the performance of its duties .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d It was shortly after this that , as I have already mentioned , CSFB opened an account for Hayford pursuant to which it began to trade , allegedly for account of Belgrave .
If , as was often the case , the shares which Hayford wished to buy or sell were traded on a US exchange such as the NASDAQ , Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s order was executed not by CSFBEL but by CSFB under the terms of its Customer Agreement with Hayford .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d After an order for a US traded security was placed by Hayford with Mr McCormack , Mr McCormack would place the order with a trader on the OTC -LRB- Over the Counter -RRB- desk at CSFB in the US and that trader would then execute the trade by buying or selling the appropriate number of shares .
According to the Belgrave US$ profit and loss figures produced by the Defendant on his computer , the trades executed by Hayford for Belgrave in January and February 2000 generated profits of US$ 174,753 and US$ 307,400 respectively .
\ n By 7 April 2001 , even ignoring trades that had still to be settled , Belgrave was almost US$ 1million overdrawn at Hambros and the position was so serious that Mr Graham , one of Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s principal points of contact at Hambros , was at that stage having to report directly to his Managing Director concerning the account .
It is also the case that on Wednesday 12 April , apparently through the intervention of Mr Radwan Al Rawi , Lloyds Bank in Geneva transferred or agreed to transfer US$ 400,000 to Belgrave \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s account with Hambros , that apparently being a requirement of Hambros without which it would have taken steps to realise certain Abbey National shares which it had since 5 April held as security .
According to the Defendant the account in Geneva from which the money came was Mr Abdulla \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s account and the Abbey National shares were beneficially owned by Mr Abdulla .
Hayford as I infer never had any significant asset beyond its entitlement to an indemnity from Belgrave .
Somewhat more attractively Mr King suggested that had the existence of Mr Abdulla or his connection with Belgrave been a pleaded issue then there might have been deployed at trial further material which could have had a bearing on the matter .
\ n It is common ground that on Friday 31 March at 15.42 the Defendant telephoned Mr McCormack and ordered 10,000 Ariba shares at market price .
\ n The blotter records six trades for 30 and 31 March as follows , and in the order indicated : - \ n 30 March a purchase of 2000 Juniper shares at US$ 280.0625 through Lehman Brothers designated reference number 641 .
For 30 and 31 March it contained the same information as on the blotter save only that there has been added , as transaction reference number 642 , a sale of 4,000 shares in Juniper at US$ 290 through Lehman Brothers .
That does not explain why on Thursday 6 April the Defendant told Mr Robson of Hambros that three sales , Ariba , Juniper and RT-Set had all been placed with the same night salesman at CSFB on 31 March .
What the Defendant told Mr Robson on 6 April in fact contained a further lie in relation to Juniper which sale he had incidentally attributed to Lehman Brothers in the dealing instructions .
He then found out that Lehman Brothers knew nothing about it and he finally sold through Merrill Lynch on 13 April .
In an affidavit \ xc2 \ xb9 sworn by Catherine Heard , a director of the CSFB Legal Department , on 29 March 2001 in connection with interlocutory proceedings Miss Heard at paragraph 48 said this : - \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cI should also mention that Kieren McCormack recalls a conversation with Rawi on 3 April 2000 -LRB- after the purchase of the Ariba stock had been made -RRB- .
In the course of that conversation Rawi expressed concern about Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s exposure on Ariba , believing at that time that the share price was falling .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cThe Claimant has relied upon a conversation between Mr McCormack and me on 3 April in which I appear to be concerned because I was exposed on the purchase of Ariba stock .
As transcribed , it went as follows : - \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cTape No : CS 03 W380 CH 84 Date : April 3 2000 Time \ t \ tSpeaker \ tTranscript 13:53:12 \ tKM \ t \ tFirst Boston FR \ t \ tHi Kieren KM \ t \ tYeah FR \ tQuick question for you-you know Ariba .
Mr McCormack said in evidence that it was quite clear from this conversation that the Defendant considered Hayford to be exposed to Ariba , at least as at 3 April .
He suggested that the Defendant would have been unlikely to make these comments to Mr McCormack if he was about to perpetrate a fraud on CSFB which involved a suggestion that CSFB had sold or accepted an order to sell the Ariba shares on Friday 31 March .
Having acknowledged that there were mistakes in the dealing instructions in relation to Juniper , Portal and RT-Set he continued : - \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cThus although I thought there was a sale order for the sale of shares in RT-Set Ltd , when I was told by Mr McCormack that there was not , I accepted the position and placed another sale order for Euros 40,000 less .
As early as his third affidavit the Defendant had asserted that on 6 and 7 April he had at least two telephone calls from employees of CSFB in New York who rang him to ask about settlement of the purchase , by which he meant the Ariba purchase .
\ n I have also already mentioned that the Defendant maintained throughout that on 6 and 7 April he had at least two telephone calls from employees of CSFB in New York who rang to ask him about settlement of the Ariba purchase .
In the first place it is inherently unlikely that any operations personnel in New York would wish to speak directly to a London based client of a London based trader .
On 6 April the Defendant told Mr Robson of Hambros that CSFB had told him that they knew nothing about the Ariba sale .
Yet on 7 April the Defendant told Mr Graham at Hambros that \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cI \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve been promised by CSFB that when New York opens they \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ll get some confirms out for me \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d in relation to Ariba and RT-Set .
CSFB , whether in London or New York , could never have said that they would send out a confirmation in respect of the Ariba sale because they had never been instructed to execute it .
The Defendant has attributed the calls to New York because he knew full well that his conversations with the bank staff in London would have been recorded .
He may also have known that the now virtually universal practice in the City of London of tape recording telephone conversations of this sort does not extend to New York , where , I believe , different legal considerations obtain .
\ n \ tIt follows from the foregoing that I must also obviously reject as a pure contemporary invention the suggestion made by the Defendant to Mr Robson on 6 April that he had placed the sale orders for Ariba , Juniper and RT-Set with the same night salesman at CSFB on Friday 31 March .
Equally , it was untrue so far as concerned Juniper , the sale order in respect of which had on the dealing instructions been attributed to Lehman Brothers .
I have no doubt whatever that the Defendant knew full well when he made this representation to Mr Robson that it was equally untrue so far as concerned the Ariba shares .
\ n \ tBetween 6 April and 12 April 2000 there were some 14 telephone conversations between the Defendant and Mr McCormack , the latter being as I have already mentioned the trader at CSFB with whom the Defendant most frequently dealt and with whom he had placed the Ariba purchase order .
The Defendant \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s explanation for his failure to mention the Ariba sale to Mr McCormack was that at the time he believed that Hambros were chasing CSFB in relation to it , and that it never occurred to him that Mr McCormack would be unaware of the failed trade .
On 4 April Lee Crerar at CSFB telephoned Mr Graham of Hambros in relation to another Hayford trade , Versatel .
His opening words to Mr Graham were \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cokay , Chris , I was just querying all these trades now CSFB are gon na get back to me they are totally lost .
\ n \ tEarly on the morning of 6 April Mr Andre Gibb of the CSFB back office telephoned Mr Graham to discuss the fact that Hambros had failed to settle Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s purchase of Ariba shares on the due date , which was the previous day 5 April .
Mr Graham in turn replied \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cNo \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d by which he meant confirmation of the sale of Ariba shares which the dealing instructions told him had been concluded on the same day as the purchase at a higher price .
He continued \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cWe \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve been missing the whole raft of them and I know that the person , Belgrave is it , oh sorry Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d at which point Mr Gibb confirmed that it was Hayford and Mr Graham continued \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cYeah I don \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99t think you guys have been sending through contract notes , I know Hayford has been onto your people yesterday about it .
The Defendant told Mr Graham that he had told CSFB that he had \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cthe settlement on hold at the moment \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d by which he meant that he had told CSFB that he had the settlement of the Ariba purchase on hold .
The Defendant intended that Hambros would decline to settle the Ariba purchase with CSFB until CSFB settled the supposed sale order , and he intended thereby to induce CSFB not to close out the purchase order and not to take immediate steps to enforce its rights against Hayford under the customer agreement whilst it investigated whether there had indeed been a sale order .
He acknowledged receipt of a fax sent by Mr Gibb confirming the Ariba purchase but pointed out that it was actually confirmation of the sale that Hambros were missing \ xe2 \ x80 \ x94reflecting the fact that Mr Gibb and Mr Graham had on the previous day been at cross purposes .
Mr Robson also told Mr Gibb that Hambros were missing confirmation from CSFB in relation to two more trades , Juniper and RT-Set .
Unless such a conversation had taken place I can not understand why Mr Robson should have attributed the Juniper sale to CSFB as opposed to Lehman Brothers to whom it is attributed on the dealing instructions .
Only 32 out of 100 extensions at Hambros were recorded and the search for relevant conversations which Mr Robson or Mr Graham may have had on recorded extensions other than their own is unlikely to have been successful in uncovering every conceivably relevant conversation .
However nothing turns on whether there had in fact been the conversation which I deduce since as I have already remarked in a later telephone conversation on 6 April of which there is a record the Defendant asserted to Mr Robson that all three sales , that is Ariba , Juniper and RT-Set had been placed with the same CSFB night salesman on the same day .
Specifically in relation to Ariba Mr Robson told Mr Gibb that \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cas long as we \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve got the sell , we \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ll put the sell and the buy through today .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ n \ tLater on the same day Mr Gibb called Mr Robson to report that CSFB could not trace any details of either the Ariba or the Juniper sales .
There then took place the conversation to which I have already twice referred in the course of which the Defendant told Mr Robson that the three sales , Ariba , Juniper and RT-Set had all been placed with the same night salesman at CSFB on the same day , notwithstanding incidentally that the dealing instructions in addition to attributing the Juniper sale to Lehman Brothers also placed it on 30 March whereas the other two sales were indicated to have taken place on 31 March .
\ n \ tOn 7 April Mr Gibb called Mr Robson to discuss the fact that the Ariba purchase had again not been settled \ xe2 \ x80 \ x94in the jargon it had been \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cDK \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99d \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d again , i.e .
\ n \ tLater on the same day the Defendant told Mr Graham at Hambros \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cI \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve been promised by CSFB that when New York opens they \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ll get out some confirms for me .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d He said that that applied to Ariba and RT-Set and that it was CSFB who had sold Juniper and that they had promised to sort something out on that too .
The Defendant and Mr Graham went on to discuss the extent to which Belgrave was overdrawn and the reduction in the overdraft which the sales proceeds would bring about .
He told him \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cabout those trades \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cright its CSFB New York \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d intending to convey , I think , that it would be from CSFB New York that sale confirmations should be expected for Ariba , Juniper and RT-Set .
There must have been an earlier conversation of which there is no record , or no traced record , in which the Defendant gave those names to Mr Robson or , more likely , to Mr Graham .
The names are in fact the first names of Mr McCormack and Mr Quaradeghini , neither of whom are of course end of day salesmen and both of whom were based in the London office .
Mr Robson went on : - \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cFabio I suppose is F-A-B-I-O , yeah , apparently our customers \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d been on the phone to New York , I think I \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve been assured , well I \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve been told that the trade should come through early this afternoon , do you want me to give you a call if that \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s the case ?
It seems likely that Mr Robson was relying on what he must have been told by Mr Graham about what the Defendant had said to him in the earlier conversation to which I have already referred in paragraph 42 above .
Either he or Mr Graham may have inferred that because the confirmations were apparently going to come from New York so it followed the Defendant had been on the telephone to New York to discuss the same .
Interestingly Mr Gibb understood these remarks to refer to conversations with the CSFB traders in London who dealt with trades on the New York market , although that can have no bearing on what the Defendant may have said to Mr Robson , or more likely to Mr Graham , in the conversation of which there is no record in the course of which the names Kieren and Fabio were given .
Looked at overall I am satisfied that this tentative reference by Mr Robson to the Defendant having been on the phone to New York does not enable me to conclude , against the weight of the evidence and the probabilities , that the Defendant had indeed been on the phone to New York and moreover that those telephone calls had been made from New York .
In any event the names seem to have been given in circumstances which engendered at the least confusion as to whether the persons of that name were in London or New York .
Mr Robson told Mr Gibb not to put the trade through by which he meant not to attempt to deliver the Ariba stock \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cbecause obviously that trade will fail if you put it through .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d Mr Robson went on to say \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cno problem , I mean it should have been through today from CSFB New York , that \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s what CSFB , you know , guaranteed our customer .
On the afternoon of Monday 10 April the Defendant called Mr Robson and told him that CSFB were still looking into the sale of the Ariba shares .
\ n \ tOn 12 April the Defendant called Hambros intending to speak to Mr Graham but his telephone was picked up by Mr Robson .
Mr Robson told the Defendant that Ariba was still outstanding .
Later in the day Mr Gibb phoned Mr Robson to chase the Ariba purchase .
\ n \ tLater on this day there took place the first conversation between the Defendant and Mr McCormack in the course of which the question of the delayed settlement of the ARIBA purchase and the missing ARIBA sale were discussed .
Mr McCormack told the Defendant that one of his new trade support chaps , in fact Mr Gibb , had just come over and mentioned to him that \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cwe have a small settlement issue regarding Ariba .
\ tLater in the day Mr McCormack chased the Defendant concerning Ariba .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d The Defendant continued \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cAnd I know that supposed sale order that went in for that Ariba which I can not find anywhere \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d to which Mr McCormack responded \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cWho does that go in with ?
That instruction was vividly reinforced when , shortly after this conversation with Mr McCormack , the Defendant spoke again to Mr Graham .
He told Mr Graham that he had been on the telephone that morning with CSFB to sort out Ariba , and that CSFB were talking to their people .
Mr Graham responded , as was his understanding , that CSFB were on both sides of the Ariba transaction , i.e .
He indicated assent also to Mr Graham \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s proposition that CSFB could get stuffed until they had straightened out the position , by which he meant produced a confirmation of the Ariba sale .
\ n \ tOn the following Monday morning 17 April the Defendant called Mr McCormack and requested an extension on Ariba because he was having problems with his client .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d The Defendant continued \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cnow I have been trying to get in touch with , er , Billy , who is travelling in the Far East at the moment \ xe2 \ x80 \ xa6 cause I didn \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99t write down any order and I didn \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99t even put an order in \ xe2 \ x80 \ xa6 I \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ve seen him written something saying CSFB is sell order and he \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s insisting he sold the stock at 220 and he \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s not allowing the custodian to accept delivery of the stock until \ xe2 \ x80 \ xa6 .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d This conversation contains the first of a series of untruths in the course of which the Defendant was attempting to suggest that Billy might have been involved in the Ariba transaction and that he was unable to check with him because he was travelling in the Far East .
In fact Billy went to Singapore on Monday 3 April for one week .
He was then in London , or at any rate not abroad , for a period of about two weeks before \ treturning to the Far East for a further two weeks .
Mr Graham told the Defendant that Mr McCormack had been on the phone concerning the Ariba trade and that he , Mr Graham , had not replied to him one way or another on that subject .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d Mr Graham indicated that Hambros were not doing that but that he would have to tell Mr McCormack something because Mr McCormack was asking if Hambros had seen \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cthe sales ticket \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d by which of course was meant a confirmation of the Ariba sale .
Mr McCormack then enquired whether Hambros had received something from Hayford .
Mr Graham confirmed that they had and then read over to Mr McCormack the relevant contents of the dealing instructions insofar as they related to the Ariba purchase and sale .
He said that Billy was in Bangkok .
Mr Quaradeghini believed that the Ariba purchase would settle as soon as the Defendant had had the opportunity to speak to Billy and/or his client .
Out of deference no doubt to the fact that London did not trade on Good Friday -LRB- 21 April -RRB- and that the Defendant was apparently flying to the Middle East in a final attempt to resolve the situation , both of which matters had been impressed upon Mr Benjamin by Mr Quaradeghini , the decision was to hold the stock over the weekend but to take immediate action the following week if Hayford did not settle the trade .
On the next working day Tuesday 25 April CSFB gave notice to the Defendant that they would sell the Ariba shares at Hayford \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s risk and commence litigation against Hayford for breach of contract and fraud .
\ n CSFB \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s failure to execute the order of Hayford resulted in a loss of profit to Hayford of US $ 163,375 for which , CSFB is responsible and you may consider this letter as a formal demand to pay this amount .
Other notable points are the assertion that there had been placed a \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cgood \ xe2 \ x80 \ x98til cancelled order , \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d the suggestion that Hayford did not know that the sale was not executed until 11 April and the simply astonishing complaint that CSFB failed to notify Hayford that Hayford had failed to comply with its obligation to pay for the Ariba shares on 5 April .
Mr King pointed out that the Defendant at no time stated unequivocally that Hayford would settle .
As it was , he was induced into believing that the problem was being sorted out by the traders , and it matters not that his understanding of what the Defendant talking to New York may have involved differed from that of Mr Robson .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d I can however think of no reason why Mr McCormack should not have placed confidence in the statement that the reason why the trade had not been settled was because of a backlog of purchases , especially when the Defendant was at the same time not suggesting that Hayford was not bound by its obligation .
Most people would infer from that that the Defendant was indicating that there was no reason to doubt that Hayford would in due course honour its obligation , and that is what Mr McCormack did infer .
It was at this point that Mr McCormack elevated the matter to his superiors , calling Tanya Torres in the Fail Control Department in New York and making contact also with Mr Quaradeghini who was en route to New York when the information emerged that the Defendant was in dispute with his client .
When finally Mr Quaradeghini called Mr McCormack from his hotel room at O230 on 18 April Mr McCormack responded to the enquiry why \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cwe didn \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99t find out about this \ xe2 \ x80 \ x98til now \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d with the response , as was indeed the case , \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cthe only time it became an issue to us was yesterday when we found out that the whole reason they were not settling it is because they needed to speak to their client before then it was just like Faris saying \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cwe \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99ll settle it \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d he just doing some checking and come back to you \ xe2 \ x80 \ xa6 .
However in case it is necessary I should record that again I accept Mr Quaradeghini \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s evidence as to his reliance thereafter on what he was told by the Defendant , particularly the representation that he was flying out to see his client in the Middle East but also the suggestion that things might become more clear after he had had an opportunity to check the position with his assistant Billy .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ tThe accuracy of that account is borne out by the fact that it is precisely the way in which Mr Quaradeghini put it to Mr Benjamin when , in the course of a tape recorded telephone conversation on 20 April , he explained why he would prefer to take no action until after the weekend by which time the Defendant would have returned from his trip to the Middle East .
If he had been told the truth , it would have been immediately apparent that Hayford was not going to settle the purchase and that if CSFB held onto the Ariba shares it would be running the risk of both a fall in the price and an inability to recover any of the resultant loss from Hayford .
Indeed , when Mr Gibb was first provided by Hambros with information which suggested that there might be a potential problem with the Ariba purchase , he raised the matter with Mr McCormack and Lee Crerar .
acknowledge his liability to pay for the Ariba purchase , the bank had to be concerned that a forced sale of the shares at a loss could and might well involve them in dispute with Hayford and its principal even if that might be a dispute in which it would expect ultimately to be successful .
If CSFB had had proper procedures in place they would have been able to make a decision to close out the purchase at a much earlier stage ; -LRB- 3 -RRB- \ tThere was no system in place to put into effect Section G of the Branch Management Supervisory Procedures under which Mr Quaradeghini or Mr McCormack should have contacted Hayford when money was due ; -LRB- 4 -RRB- \ tMr Quaradeghini and Mr McCormack were not properly instructed as to what to do when a purchase failed .
b ` Mr Justice Thomas : Introduction Goods shipped by the claimants in Hong Kong in containers were carried to Chile on the defendants \ xc2 \ x92 liner services ; they were cleared through customs and delivered to a person not entitled to the goods without presentation of the bills of lading .
\ n The facts The claimants are related companies and carry on in Hong Kong a business of exporting goods manufactured in China to other countries in the world .
For some time they had been selling goods to Gold Crown , a company based in Santiago , Chile .
The claimants shipped goods at Hong Kong in containers on liner services for delivery in Chile .
\ n The containers carried by Maersk arrived at San Antonio , Chile between the end of October and November 1998 ; those carried by P&O -LRB- on a chartered vessel -RRB- arrived at San Antonio and were discharged from the vessel on 10 March 1999 .
In accordance with the Customs laws of Chile , as duty had not been paid in advance , the containers had to be placed on arrival in a licensed Customs warehouse : \ n The goods carried by Maersk were placed by their agents AJ Broom in a Customs warehouse operated by Seaport SA at San Antonio ; \ n those carried by P&O were placed by the ship \ xc2 \ x92s agents , Agencias Universales SA , first in a container yard and then moved to a licensed customs warehouse operated by Empressa Porturia de Chile de San Antonio at San Antonio .
Furthermore the Hamburg Rules were in force in Chile ; under Article 4 of the Hamburg Rules , Maersk and P&O were discharged from responsibility in such circumstances .
The goods remained in the ownership of the claimants and neither their bankers in Hong Kong nor the correspondent bankers in Chile obtained any security or other interest in them .
The claimants then asked Maersk to issue new bills naming Banco de Chile as consignee and the new buyer as the notify party .
\ n They contended that the same policy considerations that enabled the principal of a consignee or a consignor to sue under an air waybill under the provisions of the Warsaw and Guadalajara Conventions should apply ; they relied particularly on the judgment of Mance LJ in Western Digital v BA -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 142 at paragraphs 43 , 44 and 81 .
It is clear that there is scope for the operation of the doctrine of undisclosed principals in relation to rights of suit under bills of lading at common law : see for example the speech of Lord Blackburn in Sewell v Burdick -LRB- 1884 -RRB- 10 App Cas 74 at 90-1 .
For example in Gatewhite v Iberia Airlines -LSB- 1989 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 160 , Gatehouse J referred to the curious position that could arise if the right of suit depended on the willingness of the consignee to sue , as in such cases he might have little incentive being a customs agent or forwarding agent or bank ; the same point was made by the Hong Kong Court of Appeal in Regaalite International Limited v Air Cargo Consolidation Service -LRB- UK -RRB- Ltd .
In Barclays Bank v Commissioners of Customs and Excise -LSB- 1963 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 81 , Diplock LJ summarised the general rule at p 89 : \ xc2 \ x93The contract for the carriage of goods by sea is a combined contract of bailment and transportation \ xc2 \ x85 Such a contract is not discharged by performance until the shipowner has actually surrendered possession -LRB- that is divested himself of all powers to control any physical dealing in the goods -RRB- to the person entitled under the terms of the contract to obtain possession of them \ xc2 \ x94 The specific issue , however , is whether the contract of carriage is discharged if the goods are delivered to a person other than the person entitled under the bill of lading .
\ xc2 \ x94 In the House of Lords , Lord Hatherly LC agreeing with this went on to state : \ xc2 \ x93When they have arrived at the dock , until they are delivered to some person who has the right to hold them , the bill of lading remains the only symbol that can be dealt with by way of assignment , or mortgage or otherwise \ xc2 \ x85Until that time bills of lading are effective representations of the ownership of the goods , and their force does not become extinguished until possession , or what is equivalent in law to possession , has been taken on the part of the person having the right to demand it .
Although Diplock LJ left the question open in Barclays Bank v Customs and Excise , in The Delfini -LSB- 1988 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 599 , the correctness of the observations of Channell J was accepted by the parties .
In the Court of Appeal -LSB- 1993 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 542 , the decision was affirmed on grounds which made it unnecessary for the Court of Appeal to decide the issue on whether the bill of lading was spent .
There was also no attornment as there was no intention to transfer title to the goods ; the claimants relied on the judgment of Judge Diamond QC in The Federal Express -LSB- 1992 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 79 at 95 and a passage in the speech of Lord Brandon of Oakbrook in The Aliakmon -LSB- 1986 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 1 at 10 .
A mere contractual right to possession was not sufficient to found a right to sue in conversion : Jarvis v Williams -LSB- 1955 -RSB- 1 WLR 71 ; International Factors v Rodriguez -LSB- 1979 -RSB- QB 351 at 357 .
A special or general property in goods was only passed if that was the intention ; as Lord Bramwell said in Sewell v Burdick -LRB- 1884 -RRB- 10 App Cas 74 at 105 : \ xc2 \ x93 .
For example , if the bill was endorsed to an agent to enable him to sell the goods , no property would pass to the agent : see Scrutton -LRB- 20 th edition -RRB- : Article 104 -LRB- 3 -RRB- and the old cases of Waring v Cox -LRB- 1808 -RRB- 1 Camp 369 and Patten v Thompson -LRB- 1816 -RRB- 5 M&S 350 -LRB- which explains this partly on the grounds that no consideration or value was given for the transfer -RRB- .
\ n The right so transferred is not a \ xc2 \ x93mere contractual \ xc2 \ x94 right to possession of the goods of the kind discussed in Jarvis v Williams and International Factors v Rodriguez .
I am quite satisfied that it was wholly impracticable for the claimants to have sought to recover the goods from Gold Crown in Chile ; thus they were permanently deprived of their proprietary interest and thus they can maintain this claim against Maersk and P&O .
\ n The provisions of the law of Chile relating to delivery : the Customs laws Maersk and P&O accepted that there was no provision in the Commercial Code of Chile that expressly relieved a carrier of any obligation to deliver goods otherwise than against presentation of an original bill of lading .
\ n Maersk and P&O called Mr Tomasello ; he had specialised in maritime law in Chile since 1970 and lectured at a University since 1966 in civil law and since 1995 in maritime law .
Indeed the evidence of Mr Parra , P&O \ xc2 \ x92s cargo claims representative for Latin America based in Santiago Chile , was to the effect that , although the carrier \ xc2 \ x92s agents acted on the basis of the Customs agent \ xc2 \ x92s statements , they could ask for the original bill of lading ; the Customs agent would in effect be bound to produce it as otherwise he would be denounced to Customs who would then check his file to see if it contained the original .
\ n The Hamburg Rules Chile incorporated the Hamburg Rules into its Code of Commerce in 1988 .
In The Houda -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 541 , Leggatt LJ expressed the position in this way : \ n \ xc2 \ x93 Under a bill of lading contract a shipowner is obliged to deliver goods upon production of the original bill of lading .
\ n Second , it was contended that clause 17.1 -LRB- e -RRB- in the Maersk bill and the identical clause in the P&O bill entitled the carrier to comply with any government order ; on the findings I have made in relation to the law of Chile , there was no such order .
They relied on a short passage in the judgment of Clarke J in The Sormovskiy 3068 -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 266 .
After referring to the Houda and noting that The Sormovskiy 3068 did not appear to have been cited to the Court of Appeal in that case , Rix J expressed the view that the exception which the carrier sought to derive from the The Sormovskiy 3068 did not exist ; the remedy in circumstances where the original bill of lading could not be produced was to persuade the carrier to accept an indemnity or go to Court .
In the Court of Appeal , the argument on this point was not pursued by the carrier -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 211 at 213 , para 7 .
The position of the consignee and the shipowner can and should in the circumstances envisaged by Clarke J be protected by an indemnity or an application to court as is made clear in the judgments in the Court of Appeal in The Houda .
\ n The obligation under the bills of lading and the law and custom at the port of discharge in Chile Thus as a matter of English law , I am satisfied that the obligation in bailment and contract upon P&O and Maersk was only to deliver against presentation of an original bill of lading .
\ n If under the law of Chile I had concluded that Maersk and P&O were under an obligation to deliver the cargo to a Customs warehouse without presentation of a bill of lading and that discharged their delivery obligations , that would have given rise to more difficult questions as to the scope of the principle in The Sormovskiy 3068 and of Article 10 .
It was consistent with the principle , set out for example by Staughton J in Libyan Arab Bank v Bankers Trust -LSB- 1989 -RSB- QB 728 that performance was excused if the act required was necessarily unlawful in the place of performance and therefore performance was discharged by illegality .
The claimants , had I reached a different conclusion on the law of Chile would have sought to argue that in the case of the Maersk bills -LRB- where there was an express obligation to deliver against presentation of the bill of lading -RRB- that there was a collateral warranty that performance in that way could be carried out lawfully in Chile : they relied on Walton -LRB- Grain and Sipping -RRB- Ltd v British Italian Trading Co -LSB- 1959 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 223 and Pagnan v Tradax -LSB- 1987 -RSB- 2 All ER 565 .
\ xc2 \ x94 P&O relied on the judgment of Shellier JA -LRB- with whom Cripps JA agreed -RRB- in the New South Wales Court of Appeal in The Antwerpen -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xc2 \ x92s Rep 213 .
b ` Mr Justice Thomas : On 7 February 2002 I gave judgment -LRB- -LSB- 2002 -RSB- EWHC 83 -LRB- Comm -RRB- -RRB- in favour of the claimants in two actions brought by them against the defendants -LRB- P&O and Maersk -RRB- for misdelivery of containers which were delivered without presentation of the bills of lading .
In considering whether it is unjust , I have had regard to the level at which the offer was made and its terms , the fact that it was made sufficiently far in advance of the trial to save a considerable amount of the costs incurred in bringing the Chilean lawyers to London and the fact that the essence of the claimants \ ' case was known to Maersk and P&O at the time of the offer -LRB- even though the experts \ ' reports had not been exchanged -RRB- .
\ r In considering the enhancement of the rate of interest , circumstances will vary infinitely ; although I have considered the decision of Aikens J in The Vergina -LRB- No 3 -RRB- -LSB- 2002 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep 238 , the particular circumstances of that case are different to this .
However those issues apart , the issues were essentially issues of law , both of Chile and of England and Wales .
I have also had regard to the fact that Maersk and P&O have agreed a generous rate of interest by agreeing to pay as an ordinary rate 1 % over US Prime .
\ r Permission to appeal and other matters Permission to appeal Maersk and P&O seek permission to appeal on all the issues other than my findings on the law of Chile ; apart from the finding of negligence , these are all pure issues on the law of England and Wales .
If I had concluded that Maersk and P&O were entitled to succeed on one of the issues of the law of England and Wales which they had advanced and which enabled them to defeat the claims , then I would have nonetheless determined , exercising my discretion under CPR Part 44.3 -LRB- 4 -RRB- , that they should bear the costs of the Chilean law and mitigation issues .
The share capital of Fortune is owned by an organ of the People \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Republic of China -LRB- the PRC -RRB- .
\ n The LOI was issued , on the basis that the Bills of Lading were not then available for negotiation , to obtain payment of the full price of the cargo , US $ 915,000 , under the terms of a Letter of Credit dated 26 August 1997 issued by the Yien Yieh Commercial Bank at the request of Fortune .
The Letter of Credit named Cosco-Feoso as beneficiary and the Singapore branch of the Bank of China as the Advising Bank .
It was expressed to cover shipment from Asian Seaport to Hainan , China , latest 10 September 1997 .
\ n Cosco-Feoso also issued a Letter of Indemnity dated 7 August 1997 to the owners of the Freja Scandic -LRB- `` The Owners LOI '' -RRB- by which Cosco-Feoso requested the owners to deliver the same cargo of gasoil to Sinochem Hainan Co. Ltd at the Port of Sanya , Hainan , China without the production of the Bills of Lading and undertook to deliver the Bills to the owners as soon as Cosco-Feoso obtained them .
On this issue expert evidence of Hong Kong law was given by Clifford Smith SC -LRB- instructed by Fortune -RRB- and Benjamin Chain , a Barrister -LRB- instructed by Cosco-Feoso -RRB- .
Miss Wang \ 's evidence was that the state-established wholesale price of gasoil at Sanya , Hainan during August/September 1997 was RMB 2,974 pmt -LRB- equivalent to US$ 358.75 -RRB- so that the wholesale price of the cargo would be 14,870,00 RMB or $ 1,793,727.38 and that import duty , consumer tax , VAT and import agents fees would reduce the dollar value of the cargo to $ 1,481,450.90 .
\ n Fortune carried on business as importers and exporters and in 1997 was engaged in particular in the purchase of goods overseas for import , usually through Hong Kong , into mainland China .
\ tMr Sheng had known a Mr Yu Jianbin when Mr Yu had been Head of Department in the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Corporation of the PRC and the superior of Mr Sheng .
In the summer of 1997 Mr Yu told Mr Sheng that Pacific Fond was in business as an oil trader and had the opportunity to buy oil from Cosco-Feoso which it could sell at a reasonable profit in the PRC , but Pacific Fond did not have enough banking facilities and had cash flow problems which meant it might not be able itself to complete the deal .
Mr Yu asked whether Fortune would help by arranging a letter of credit for the price of the oil .
\ n THE SECOND AGREEMENT AND THE LETTER OF CREDIT \ t \ tMr Yu then sought help from Fortune with the transaction which has led to these proceedings .
CF/PI 053/97 dated 01 August 1997 and shipped aboard the vessel MY Freja Scandic at the port of Pasir Gudang , Malaysia pursuant to B/L dated 03 August 1997 .
\ tThe papers include a copy of an original Bill of Lading for a cargo of 5000 tonnes of gasoil loaded on the Freja Scandic dated 3 August 1997 and for destination Sanya , Hainan .
It requested the owners to deliver the cargo to Sinochem Hainan Co Ltd at Sanya , Hainan , and Cosco-Feoso agreed : \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cAs soon as all original Bills of Lading for the above goods shall have arrived and/or come into our possession to produce and deliver the same to you whereupon our liability hereunder shall cease .
\ n Mr Russell submits first that no representations were made by Cosco-Feoso but only Mr Yu .
\ n Mr Russell further submits -LRB- rightly -RRB- that by the fourth paragraph of The LOI Cosco-Feoso did not warrant that it would transfer the original bill of lading to Fortune but only that it would make all reasonable efforts to obtain and surrender them to Fortune .
It is well-established that a court will not concern itself with illegality affecting an underlying contract unless the Claimant has to rely on that contract or itself asserts illegality in support of its claim : Bowmakers Limited v Barnet Instruments Limited -LSB- 1945 -RSB- KB 65 ; Tinsley v Milligan -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 AC 340 .
Mr Smith quotes from Newton v Pyke -LRB- 1908 -RRB- 25 T.L.R .
c -RRB- \ tThe state-established wholesale price for gasoil of the relevant quality at Sanya , Hainan in August/September 1997 was RMB 2,974 pmt -LRB- US$ 358.75 -RRB- .
d -RRB- \ tThe evidence of what may be called `` the international price '' of gasoil CIF Singapore or Malaysia is the agreed price of the cargo itself and the evidence of Cosco-Feoso \ 's expert , Dr McDonald .
Miss Wang \ 's statements and the way Fortune opened its case suggested that the lack of an import licence could have been surmounted either by a sale by Fortune to a company which had such a licence or by re-exporting the cargo from Sanya .
They derive substantially from the decisions of the House of Lords in Williams Brothers v Agius -LSB- 1914 -RSB- AC 510 -LRB- in particular Lord Dunedin at page 523 -RRB- and The Texaco Melbourne -LSB- 1994 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ 's Rep. 473 -LRB- in particular Lord Goff at page 479 -RRB- .
\ n Mr Russell submitted that the sale by Cosco-Feoso referred to in The LOI and Invoice was a `` sham '' and the only loss in the reasonable contemplation of the parties likely to be suffered by Fortune was the loss of the money actually expended by Fortune .
The consequence of not having an import licence plainly relates to the position in which Fortune would have found itself had it obtained the cargo at Sanya and -LRB- on Fortune \ 's own evidence -RRB- the costs it would have had to incur in order to be able to realise its value .
\ n In my judgment , however , the correct approach is , as Mr Russell submitted , to seek a value for the goods on the basis that Fortune had sought to obtain the very thing to which it was entitled , namely a cargo of 5000 mt of gasoil on board ship or held to the ship \ 's order at the port of Sanya .
\ n ERC carries on business as a reinsurer in Kansas , U.S.A .
The claimants are all insurance companies , many carrying on business in the United States , some in Canada , one in Ireland and one in the United Kingdom .
Lincoln made two payments in respect of certain claims , but the other claimants declined to make any payment in respect of any of the claims unless and until ERC identified what part of the settlement sum related to \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cbodily injury \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d as defined in the cover .
In this way a dispute arose between ERC and its reinsurers as to whether any , and if so , how much , of its liability to AERO in these cases is covered by the contracts of reinsurance .
\ n With the permission of the court the claim form in each of these actions was served on ERC in Kansas .
The claimants do not admit -LRB- but do not positively deny -RRB- that ERC has incurred a liability to AERO , but they deny that the liability alleged to have been incurred is in respect of bodily injury .
\ n The evidence on this question is to be found in the witness statement of Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0David Maddox who was responsible for reviewing the claims on behalf of Lincoln .
\ n Mr. Shepherd submitted that in the light of this evidence it is impossible for Lincoln to show that the two claims in question were paid under a mistake of fact or law .
In the light of the evidence I can see a good deal of force in Mr. Shepherd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s submissions , but the fact remains that there is at the heart of this claim an issue of construction , the resolution of which is likely to affect not only the two claims which are the subject of the action but also other claims which have yet to be submitted by ERC to Lincoln under this reinsurance .
At one stage ERC sought to argue that the contracts in the present case were governed by the law of the State of Kansas , that being the state in which ERC has its principal place of business .
On that basis he drew up a wording for the first layer of the 1995 AERO contract which provided for the contract to be governed by the law of Kansas and for the courts of Kansas to have jurisdiction , subject to an agreement to arbitrate there .
However , the underwriting representative handling the business on behalf of Lincoln in London , Mr. \ xc2 \ xa0Timothy Dumenil , viewed the matter quite differently because at one stage he prepared a wording which provided for English law and jurisdiction and for arbitration in London .
Mr. Shepherd submitted that the contracts have a close connection with the United States , but that is of little help in itself since each state represents a separate country for these purposes .
\ n In seeking to exclude England as the country with which the contracts are most closely connected Mr. Shepherd pointed out that the contracts in this case were not made by reference to a standard English form , nor were they all made in the London market in the sense of being placed by London brokers direct with London underwriters in each case -LRB- although in fact the leading underwriter on the lower layer in both 1995 and 1996 wrote the risk in London and Lincoln as the leading underwriter on the upper layer in 1996 negotiated the risk through its London representative -RRB- .
Mr. Shepherd submitted that despite the cautious approval given to actions of this kind in Messier Dowty Ltd v Sabena S.A. -LSB- 2000 -RSB- Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 428 , these are not cases in which an action for a negative declaration is likely to prove helpful and that they are a clear examples of forum shopping on the part of the claimants .
\ r \ n \ tThe claimants \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 case is that the Eurasian Dream was unseaworthy in many respects and that there was a wholesale failure by the vessel \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s technical managers , Univan Ship Management of Hong Kong -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cUnivan \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- to exercise due diligence .
\ t -LRB- 2 -RRB- \ tTime charter -LRB- NYPE 46 -RRB- between Crescent and Maritime Cargo Express SA of Panama -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cMaritime Cargo \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- dated 6 May 1994 .
No point is taken on the sum of US$ 500,000 agreed by W. K. Webster with Williamson and Horrocks for salvage of the Hyundai cars and this has been agreed with owners \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 solicitors .
Simon Scott put on job ... Police have requested all 22 crew to visit police station tonight for inquiry ... Khan was trying to avoid same by telling them that some crew have gone out etc. .
Minimum required information given to them ... Captain was informed about Pereira \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s and RS Anand \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s arrival Dubai and not to give statements to third parties prior to their arrival .
\ r \ n \ tThird , none of the personnel who were sent out to Dubai/Sharjah following the casualty were called to give evidence , namely Mr. David Pereira , Mr. R. S. Anand , Mr. Khan and Mr. Simon Scott .
The last occasion on which he visited the vessel prior to the fire was when the vessel dry docked at Ulsan in Korea in June 1998 .
This inspection report was prepared by a Fourth Engineer from the Manila office -LRB- Mr. Excel C. Apura -RRB- .
As to BA sets it was pointed out to Mr. Martin that the Eurasian Alliance manual refers to seven sets .
John said that Captain Villondo was selected by Captain De Mello , although he was interviewed by Captain Thakur in the Manila office .
\ r \ n \ tCaptain Haakansson was asked about a manuscript note -LRB- 16.15 Hong Kong time -RRB- made by Mr. Sanjay Anand of a telephone call from Mr. R. S. Anand in Sharjah - -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9c ... service truck - poured some fuel carburettor -LSB- ?
Dr. Craggs is a consultant scientist with the Fire and Explosion Investigation Division of Minton , Treharne and Davies Limited .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ r \ n \ tI regret to say that in my judgment Captain Abell did not , in presenting his evidence , conform to the guidelines set out in the Ikarian Reefer -LSB- 1993 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep 68 at 81 .
\ r \ n \ tIn a letter dated 3 December 2001 -LRB- written for the purposes of the case -RRB- Captain Abell stated \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cI have not met Dr. Goudsmit , owners \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 representatives ... or any of the witnesses to discuss evidence .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d In fact Captain Abell had two meetings at More Fisher Brown \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s offices with Dr. Goudsmit and inspected two car carriers with him .
-LRB- 4 -RRB- \ tIn relation to due diligence , proof of unseaworthiness fulfils the same function as res ipsa loquitur does in ordinary cases of negligence : The Amstelslot -LSB- 1963 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep 223 at 235 per Lord Devlin ; The Fjord Wind -LSB- 2000 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 191 at 205 .
\ t -LRB- c -RRB- \ ta lack of knowledge about a particular vessel and/or its systems : Standard Oil -LRB- ibid -RRB- ; The Farrandoc -LSB- 1967 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 276 ; The Star Sea -LSB- ibid -RSB- -LRB- operation of the CO \ xc2 \ xb2 fire-fighting system -RRB- .
drunkenness , illness -RRB- : Moore v. Lunn -LRB- 1923 -RRB- 15 Ll.L.Rep .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 -LRB- per Lord Wright in Smith , Hogg & Co v. Black Sea and Baltic -LSB- 1940 -RSB- AC 997 at 1005 -RRB- .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 -LRB- The Amstelslot -LSB- 1963 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 223 at 235 per Lord Devlin .
That is to say , the owners / managers must have taken care to see that the Master / crew were \ xe2 \ x80 \ x98suitable men for the post \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 -LRB- Moore v. Lunn -LRB- 1922 -RRB- 11 Ll.L.Rep .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 -LRB- at 282 -RRB- \ t \ t -LRB- See also : Standard Oil -LRB- ibid -RRB- ; The Makedonia -LSB- ibid -RSB- at 338 -RRB- Some forms of supervision by the carrier were considered by Lord Brandon in The Marion -LSB- 1984 -RSB- 1 AC 563 at 575 : \ xe2 \ x80 \ x98The forms of supervision used vary considerably , depending no doubt on the size of the companies concerned , the number and types of ships which they operate , and the trades in which such ships are employed .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 \ tBy analogy with the approach to owners \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 or managers \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cfault \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d in the context of limitation actions , it is not permissible , in the exercise of due diligence , \ xe2 \ x80 \ x98for owners or managers to wash their hands ... of all questions ... or to leave everything to the unassisted discretion of their masters \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 -LRB- per Sir Gordon Willmer in The England -LSB- 1973 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 373 at 383 ; approved by Lord Brandon in The Marion -LSB- ibid -RSB- at 577 -RRB- .
The rule imposes a duty to adopt a sound system -LRB- Albacora v. Westcott -LSB- 1966 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep. 53 -RRB- and to exercise reasonable care in its operation .
-LRB- See also the notes of Mr. Khan \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s calls to Hong Kong \ xe2 \ x80 \ x983/O present during Jumper connection .
Suri took the line while JSL was calling Banerjee .
b ` Mr Justice Langley : The major question before the court on this restored CMC was whether certain issues -LRB- as specified in the Claimant \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Application Notice -RRB- should be tried -LRB- if necessary -RRB- only after and separately from all the other issues which arise .
\ n Mr Barnes said the key issues on liability were the questions of trading limits , Sumitomo \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s knowledge of Mr Hamanaka \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s activities and the honesty of CLR .
Whilst there was no evidence before the court to support Mr Briggs \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 statement it was made on instructions and Mr Barnes candidly acknowledged the general nature of the difficulty .
Having sailed from Colombia , the vessel was detained in Greece following the discovery of cocaine in a sea chest below the vessel \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s waterline in August 1998 .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t \ t On 19 August 1998 , the vessel arrived at the port of Aliveri in Greece in order to discharge a cargo of coal which had been loaded at Puerto Prodeco in Colombia .
\ n \ tInfringement The claimants accept that an offence is committed contrary to the Greek Narcotics Act if someone in Colombia plants cocaine on a vessel bound for Greece so that , unknown to those on board or otherwise connected to the vessel , the vessel arrives in Greece with cocaine on board .
The meaning of the phrase was considered in \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cThe Anita \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d by Mocatta J -LSB- 1970 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep 365 and the Court of Appeal -LSB- 1971 -RSB- 1 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep 487 .
\ n Miss Hopkins followed Mr. Thomas and responded to Mr. Morris \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99 submissions as to European Community Customs Law .
Miss Hopkins submitted that EU legislation and case-law relating to customs duties is irrelevant to the construction of the Policy .
\ n Mocatta J said -LRB- -LSB- 1970 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep at page 383 -RRB- : \ n \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cSince -LSB- the exception -RSB- forms part of the Institute clauses and its application may arise in relation to events in a wide variety of countries , it does not seem to me that the words \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9ccustoms regulations \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d should as a matter of construction be restricted to what in any particular jurisdiction may be designated as a customs code .
b ` Mr Justice David Steel : The claimant -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cAMICO \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- is a US insurance company that uses the name Kemper as a trading name .
It is incorporated in Illinois but is authorised to conduct insurance business in Texas .
It is incorporated in Delaware but its principal place of business is in Texas .
The named assured was \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cCellstar Corporation and its Subsidiaries \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d of Carrolton , Texas .
The policy was broked by Messrs Henley Williams & Associates Insurance Agency , of Houston , Texas -LRB- \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cHWA \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d -RRB- and was issued by AMICO / Kemper at Houston , Texas , on the 1 st December 1999 .
Of these countries , eight were in the Americas -LRB- Argentina , Brazil , Columbia , Chile , Mexico , Peru , Venezuela and the United States -RRB- , five in the Far East -LRB- China , Hong Kong , The Philippines , Singapore and Taiwan -RRB- and the remaining four in Europe -LRB- the Netherlands , Poland , Sweden and the UK -RRB- .
The schedule to the policy indicates that five of these countries were expected to account for 75 % of the sales -LRB- Brazil , China , Mexico , UK and the US -RRB- .
In response , Cellstar filed a petition in the County Civil Court of Dallas County , Texas claiming damages from AMICO for failure to settle CUK \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s claims and , in the alternative , damages from HWA for negligence in the procurement of the insurance cover .
\ n Although AMICO filed a motion to stay the action in Texas on 7 th May 2001 , it does not appear to have been pursued .
To the contrary , on 6 th June , AMICO filed a third party complaint in the Texas action , joining CUK and K & N as \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9cnecessary \ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d parties .
These additional claims concerned shipments in transit in the US , Venezuela , Switzerland , France , Germany , the UK , China , the Netherlands , Denmark , China , Peru and Mexico .
The only significant event in either set of proceedings occurring thereafter was that , on 18 th October 2001 , AMICO filed requests in the Texas proceedings for production of documents by both Cellstar and CUK .
Only three of the countries concerned were within the EU -LRB- Netherlands , Sweden and the UK -RRB- .
Whilst the UK was the site of one of the largest operations , EU sales at that time were anticipated to represent only 20 % of the total -LRB- although I recognise that there is some statistical material in the documents that the actual sales during the year gave rise to somewhat different proportions , particularly as regards the Netherlands -RRB- .
And it may yield no result , for example , in the case of a policy which insures the life of an individual habitually resident in both Belgium and New York , the policy being void according to the law applicable to it under the Rome Convention .
On any view , the risks are predominately outside the United Kingdom , indeed outside the EU .
\ xe2 \ x80 \ x9d I agree with the defendants that these provisions , if applicable , lead to the conclusion that Texas law was the governing law : - \ n a -RRB- \ tThe performance characteristic of a contract of insurance is the provision of insurance cover -LRB- see Credit Lyonnais v. New Hampshire Insurance Company -LSB- 1997 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ xe2 \ x80 \ x99s Rep 1 -RRB- .
b -RRB- \ tIndeed the only justification advanced by the claimant for instituting proceedings in England was that the Texas court would fail to apply English Law .
Suffice it to say that eventually , on 27 th February 2002 , the President of CSAT , Professor Duncan Chappell , gave a decision in a lengthy document which I have had put before me and which I have read , which is entitled `` Judgment of the Arbitral Tribunal of the Commonwealth Secretariat , February 2002 '' .
Shortly before that decision was given , the Tribunal , in another matter called Mohsin , had given a ruling on similar matters , and that matter was appealed to this court and came before David Steel J. , who gave a judgment on 1 st March 2002 , in which he reached a conclusion as to the application of the Arbitration Act 1996 to the CSAT which differed from the views of the President in his decision .
However , Mr. Stanley accepts that the Tribunal may well have been wrong in taking a different view from Steel J. , but he argues that little difference is made by this , because even if the matter had been approached on the basis of Steel J \ 's approach , the result would have been the same .
It is said finally by counsel for Mr. Faruqi that the Tribunal has in a sense forfeited the confidence of at least his client by its insistence on following its own decision in Mohsin and not following the decision of Steel J. I see that , but on the other hand it does not seem to me to be necessarily the case that it is unacceptable for the Tribunal to have taken that view .
I note that Mr. Stanley says that the decision in Mohsin is something which could be challenged and may be challenged by his client hereafter .
The claimants contend that the vessel sank in spite of efforts on the part of Mr. Kouratolos , their port captain , to get crew members from Drapetsona , near Piraeus , to Aegion to help with re-mooring her and to procure two tugs from Patras to manoeuvre the vessel back to the shore .
In particular Vangelis ought to have re-boarded the vessel at about 0900-0915 on 5th March and to have closed the watertight doors , thereby sealing off the auxiliary engine room , and/or the claimants by Captain Kouratolos and/or their agents at Patras ought to have taken steps to get tugs from Patras earlier than they did or ought to have arranged to put a crew on board and so for the vessel \ 's mooring ropes to have been attached to a shore-based winch so that the vessel could have been winched ashore .
They are both said to have fallen overboard in the course of a voyage from Piraeus to Tinos , in the Aegean , in October 1993 .
In Shell Petroleum Ltd v. Gibbs -LSB- 1982 -RSB- 1 QB 946 there was a claim for loss of cargo arising out of a complex fraud aimed at evasion of the oil embargo on South Africa .
Since the conclusion of the argument and the completion of this judgment I have encountered the speech of Lord Nichols in In re H -LSB- 1996 -RSB- AC 563 , with which Lord Goff and Lord Mustill agreed .
On 20 January 1994 the vessel was taken from Piraeus to the small port of Aegion on the southern shore of the Gulf of Corinth so that she could be laid up for the winter .
On the following day - 4 March - Vangelis stated that he left Aegion at about noon to visit the Ventouris Group Enterprises agent in Patras , Express Shipping Agency .
I interpose that on 3 June 1994 Mr Londos made a statement to the insurers \ ' Greek lawyers , Timagenis , in which he said that he did not see Vangelis on Friday , 4th March and did not see Karakassis , a temporary replacement watchman , or Vangelis at Patras in order to pay their wages .
However , in his witness statement in this trial , he confirmed that Vangelis did visit the Patras office on the Friday in order to collect his wages .
Vangelis said in cross-examination that he had not first gone to the Harbour Master \ 's Office to telephone because they did not allow people to phone from their office and he did not know whether the Office would be prepared to telephone for him .
The pleading reads : -LRB- paragraph 12 -LRB- ii -RRB- -RRB- : `` However , instead of sending men to Aegion as soon as possible from Patras -LRB- where an agent was specifically maintained , and which was only about half an hour at most from Aegion by road -RRB- , they were actually sent from Piraeus , some two and a half hours away from Aegion .
He stated that he was unaware that Vangelis had gone to Patras on 4 March to obtain money from the agent .
He therefore at once telephoned at home Christoforos Kotsambas , another Ventouris port captain , and Nicolaos Lemonis , a Ventouris port engineer , and instructed them to round up crew members from the Ventouris vessel Saturnus , which was then being repaired at Drapetsona , near Piraeus , and then get them over to Aegion .
However , he telephoned or was telephoned by Mr Papadopoulos of the Aegion Harbour Master \ 's Office at 7.55 am , which must have been before he left for his office in Patras .
He had spotted Vangelis at 5.10 pm the previous day in his red BMW in the Myrtia area going towards Aegion where the vessel was moored .
I observe that at 5.10 pm the previous day , according to his statement , Vangelis was asleep on board the vessel having returned from Patras at 2-3pm , and did not leave it until 7.30 pm when he went to Mrs Karababa to pick up the clean washing .
Accordingly , it is impossible to be confident that if Vangelis \ 's possessions in that cabin were on board when the vessel sank and still on board when the vessel was raised they must necessarily have been left undisturbed until the cabin was entered by Mr Salters .
Further , Mr Salters refers to having inspected only one cabin - not the cabin next to the engine room where Vangelis said he kept a suitcase full of clothes .
As to the evidence of Mr Kouratolos , the defendants draw attention to his failure to refer in his witness statement or his Greek maritime enquiry evidence to a telephone conversation on the morning of 5 March earlier than 9.30 am with Moutopoulos , the Coast Guard engineer to whom Vangelis said he had handed the telephone during the call which he made from the cafe in which Moutopoulos had told Kouratolos that tugs were urgently needed .
Use of the Drencher Valve as a Method of Sinking The defendants argue that if the purpose of sinking the vessel was to interfere with Mr. Ventouris \ 's plans to set up a service linking Greece , Italy and Albania , as he suggested might have been the motive , the most likely way of achieving this would not be to cause the vessel to become a total loss but to cause her sufficient damage so that she would be out of action for a long time while under repair .
It is right to add that there is no evidence to suggest that the sinking was brought about by those concerned to interfere with the projected service between Greece , Italy and Albania .
Motive : the Claimants \ ' Case The claimants \ ' case is that they were anticipating using the vessel on a new profitable service between Igoumenitsa , Bari and Durres in Albania .
It was anticipated by Mr Ventouris that the service would be exceptionally profitable because the civil war in Yugoslavia and the reconstruction of Albania was thought likely to produce substantial movement of lorry traffic between Bari and Durres .
The fighting in Yugoslavia had also closed off routes for commercial and other vehicles from Continental Europe to Greece and the routes through Italy to Adriatic ports and across to Greece by ferry were therefore heavily used and profitable .
Ventouris ferries had been operating between Igoumenitsa , Patras and Bari since 1984 and by 1994 had come to dominate that route with 80 per cent of the traffic .
Further , the port of Bari had significant advantages over Ancona and Brindisi as departure ports for Greece .
It was a much shorter distance from Igoumenitsa than Ancona and the port facilities were superior to those at Brindisi .
With the loss of the Grecia Express and the acquisition of the Pegasus and the Pollux in 1994 , the turnover fell and so did the Group net profit after depreciation - to US$ 18,785,996 .
The claimants also rely on the acquisition in March 1994 of the Pegasus and the Pollux as demonstrating that the Group had access to substantial funds .
Her speed was on the low side at 15/16 knots , but this was not of great importance if , as was anticipated , she was to travel between Greece and Italy overnight .
Further , because the vessel had been laid up for some time , she was going to have to be towed from Palermo in Sicily to Piraeus and there undergo the repairs and maintenance required to bring her into service .
He had also stated that , because a service between Italy and Albania would be likely to give rise to discord between Greek and Italian shipping interests , `` the entire business move ... .
-LRB- xi -RRB- \ tIn 1994 Mr Lemonis , in the course of his evidence to the maritime enquiry , had referred to the proposed service as one between Igoumenitsa and Bari , but had not mentioned Durres until a statement made in 1995 .
That approval was qualified by a condition restricting the purchaser from trading the vessel between Greece and Italy .
On the following day - the day before the Grecia Express was lost - Ventouris \ 's brokers re-opened negotiations at $ 3.6 million on the basis of the exclusion only of the Brindisi - Greece route .
Finally , on 10 March this offer was increased to $ 4 million , subject to the Brindisi - Greece exclusion , and that offer was then accepted .
He had originally intended to purchase the Pegasus to expand his fleet and specifically to replace the Grecia Express on other routes when it went into service between Bari , Durres and Igoumenitsa .
The defendants submit that the effect of all this evidence is that in reality the claimants never had any intention to put the Grecia Express on to the Bari - Durres - Igoumenitsa route and that such intention has been introduced simply to provide an explanation for the sinking - by Italian competitors - so as to provide the owners with an explanation inconsistent with their own involvement .
In September 1992 Mr De Leonardo , the Ventouris agent at Bari , reported by fax to Mr Ventouris on a fact-finding visit which he had just made to Albania , in the course of which he had conducted discussions with officials from the Albanian Ministry of Transport , including the Minister himself , Mr Fatos Bitinka .
However , in a telex sent by Mr De Leonardo to Mr Ventouris on 28 February 1994 he set out three alternative proposals for the schedule of the Grecia Express between Bari , Durres and Igoumenitsa and recommended that the third proposal be adopted .
It is to be inferred that the copy introducing the alterations must have been created in Albania and could not have been manufactured in Italy unless , improbably , someone in Italy had access to an Albanian official stamp .
On the night of 23/24 March 1988 , some 6 years before the loss of the Grecia Express , this vessel , which was a sister ship of the latter , sank at its moorings some 30 metres from the quay at Drapetsona near Piraeus , following an explosion caused by several limpet mines which had been attached to its hull .
On 29 October 1993 this luxury motor yacht , which was beneficially owned by Mr Ventouris through an Isle of Man company -LRB- Esperance Co. Ltd -RRB- and insured for US$ 2 million , disappeared on a voyage from Piraeus to Tinos in the Aegean while under the control of Mr Ventouris as skipper and one of his employees , a Mr Architectonides .
Although the starting point for the principle that a contract of insurance is a contract uberrimae fidei is usually taken to be the judgment of Lord Mansfield in Carter v. Boehm -LRB- 1766 -RRB- 3 Burr 1905 , there had been several earlier cases in which the courts had concluded that , in the event of non-disclosure by the assured , he should for one reason or another be disentitled to enforce the contract of insurance .
That there was a condition precedent of full disclosure of material facts was also accepted by Lord Watson in the House of Lords at -LRB- 1887 -RRB- 12 App 535 and 539 .
Lord Fitzgerald said at page 542 that he was prepared to accept substantially the judgment of Lord Esher .
in giving the judgment of the Court said with reference to Lord Esher \ 's judgment in Blackburn Low v. Vigors , supra : `` In our judgment it is clear that Lord Esher , in using the phrase \ ` condition precedent , \ ' was using it in the sense of a contingent , rather than a promissory , condition and was rejecting Duer \ 's suggestion that in the case of a contract of insurance uberrimae fidei the parties are to be treated as having promised that full disclosure has been or will be made .
However , although not necessary for the decision of the House of Lords , Lord Templeman , with whom a majority of the other members agreed , referred at -LSB- 1991 -RSB- 2 AC p280 with approval to the analysis of the legal basis for avoidance for non-disclosure referred to by Slade LJ .
The only judgment which decides conclusively whether an assumed has a duty to disclose an allegation of criminal activity of which he claims to be innocent is that of Forbes J. in Reynolds and Anderson v. Phoenix Assurance Co Ltd -LSB- 1978 -RSB- 2 Lloyds \ ' Rep 440 .
The evidence of Mr Ballantyne , Mr Gould and Mr Wright of the defendant Association was that none of them were aware of the loss of the Star One , notwithstanding its having been given substantial publicity in press reports , including Lloyd \ 's List , which mentioned that the vessel had been on charter to Mr Ventouris , and notwithstanding that the events occurred a few days before the international shipping industry fair known as Posidonia which is held in Piraeus , very close to where the Star One sank .
The only mention of the loss of that vessel to anyone at the Association of which there is any evidence took place in two conversations between Mr Wright and Mr Rooth of Clyde & Co in the course of the Posidonia period .
In view of the wide publicity which attached to the sinking it is surprising that Mr Ballantyne and Mr Gould did not hear of it .
Further replacement propellers were sent from Italy and fitted but , when Mr Ventouris tested them on a weekend trip to the island of Zakythos in the Aegean , he found the boat was too slow to reach planing speed and when it did so , the maximum speed was only 30 to 32 knots .
The route would take them from Cape Sounion past the southern tip of Makronisos , then to the sourthern tip of the island of Kea , then along the east coast of Kea until due east of the island of Yiaros and then across to Tinos .
Mr Ventouris explained in the course of cross-examination that , although the distance from Piraeus to Tinos was about 90 miles , it could be expected that , with the wind in the north to north east , the forecast rough conditions would be experienced only across a distance of 8 to 10 miles between Makronisos and Kea and across a similar distance between Kea and Yiaros , that is to say for less than 25 per cent of the total voyage .
It was put to him that a demonstration recorded on video and organised for the purposes of the Coha II trial by the defendant \ 's expert , Dr. Oakley , which involved two fit and qualified life savers trying to remove their clothes in an experimental pool at Aberdeen in surface conditions which were said to be similar to , but somewhat more benign than , those actually prevailing that night , showed that it was impossible to carry out that exercise while treading water .
As to the assertion that neither Mr. Ventouris nor Mr. Architectonides noticed that the fender was lashed to the starboard side aft until the Coha II had only 20 minutes to go before arriving at Tinos , Mr. Pike a marine consultant and surveyor and an experienced investigator of power boats called on behalf of the defendants and who gave evidence in the Coha II trial , had conducted fender tests on a Pershing 70 .
It was common ground between Dr. Oakley and Dr. Golden that the fender would have provided only 7 per cent of the bouyancy of a life jacket if the fender were used as they used it , both hanging on to the belt through the eye which would be beneath the surface .
Further , Dr. Oakley had based part of his conclusions on experimental tank tests at Aberdeen which had been filmed on video and shown in court and which are described in his second report .
Dr. Golden put this at fifty per cent of maximum oxygen intake -LRB- VO2 max -RRB- and Dr. Oakley accepted this , on the assumption that they were being dragged downwind by the fender .
Taking the evidence of survival as a whole and giving due consideration to the immensely demanding problems of keeping their airways free of water and keeping up morale as identified by Dr Oakley and Mr Pike , I am not persuaded that the account of their time in the sea given by Mr Ventouris and Mr Architectonides is so improbable as to suggest fabrication .
It covered the whole of the west coast of Tinos , the west and south coast of Mikonos , the west coast of Rinia as well as part of the coasts of Patmos and Ikaria .
On 22 February 1990 Simpson Spence & Young , London , provided the Bank with a valuation in the sum of $ 4.25 million , some 21 per cent higher than that of Anderson Hughes .
A vessel called Expresso Malta , and subsequently renamed Pegasus , had been valued by Mr Langstrom at US$ 2.5 million .
He could have closed the doors and left the vessel , all in about 4 minutes , an estimate with which Mr Sinclair , the claimants \ ' expert , agreed , provided that Vangelis knew how the doors were operated .
Vangelis should have realised that there was a need for tugs as soon as he saw that the ropes had been cut and he ought to have called for tugs , even before the Harbour Authority officer Papadopoulos telephoned Londos at 0755 .
\ r \ n The owners ought to have sent men from Patras , as well as from Drapetsona , to help in the re-mooring of the vessel .
That means that by the earliest time at which a team of men from Patras could reasonably have been expected to be assembled by Capt Kouratolos and conveyed to the vessel , perhaps one hour from the time of the first call from Vangelis -LRB- 0815 to 0830 -RRB- , it would already appear to be too dangerous for anyone to go aboard , even for a few minutes , let alone for the considerably longer period needed to pay out the mooring ropes .
Mr. Sinclair then attempted to do various computer programme investigations at the last minute , but he was never given a fair opportunity to consider Mr. Bowman \ 's theory .
Justice Teare : In this case the Defendant seeks a stay of the proceedings commenced against it in this jurisdiction by the Claimant on the grounds that Singapore is the forum conveniens for the determination of the dispute between the parties .
\ r \ n The Claimant , Deutsche Bank AG London Branch , -LRB- `` DB '' -RRB- commenced proceedings in the Commercial Court against the Defendant , CIMB Bank Berhad , -LRB- `` CIMB '' -RRB- a Malaysian bank with a branch in London , seeking the sum of US$ 9,959,452.57 , being the principal sum which CIMB is said to be liable to reimburse DB following DB \ 's payment of such sum under letters of credit governed by UCP 600 , together with interest .
The letters of credit had been issued by CIMB and DB had , pursuant to the authority of CIMB , confirmed those letters of credit .
DB has expressed forensic -LRB- and perhaps genuine -RRB- disappointment that CIMB has not only refused to indemnify it in respect of the sums paid under the letters of credit but has also sought a stay of DB \ 's action .
\ r \ n This Application was heard on a Friday afternoon on a busy applications day in the Commercial Court .
That is in keeping with the guidance of Lord Neuberger in VTB Capital v Nutriek International Corporation -LSB- 2013 -RSB- 2 AC 337 at paragraph 82 that applications of this nature `` should not involve masses of documents , long witness statements , detailed analysis of the issues and long argument '' .
I do so with the assistance of a chronology prepared by Mr. Fletcher , counsel for CIMB , and the evidence filed on this Application .
\ r \ n By an agreement dated 19 November 2013 -LRB- `` the Facility Letter '' -RRB- CIMB agreed to provide banking facilities to its customer Cashcot Industries Pte .
Ltd. , -LRB- `` Cashcot '' -RRB- a trading company based in Singapore , in order to finance the purchase of goods by Cashcot using , in particular , letters of credit .
CIMB \ 's standard terms and conditions provided , at paragraph 8 , for a General Indemnity in these terms : \ r \ n `` As a separate and independent obligation , the relevant Obligor , shall fully indemnify the Bank from and against any expense , loss , damage or liability -LRB- as to the amount of which certificate from the Bank shall , in the absence of manifest error , be conclusive -RRB- which the Bank may incur or suffer \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85.by issuing or establishing a L/C at an Obligor \ 's request or otherwise in connection with the Facilities \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85 \ xc2 \ x85 .
Between 3 September 2015 and 14 October 2015 CIMB opened 10 letters of credit at the request of Cashcot in favour of Global Tradinglinks Limited of Hong Kong -LRB- `` Global '' -RRB- to finance the purchase by Cashcot of Indian cotton .
The requisite documents were to be presented at the premises of DB in London who was authorised by CIMB to add its confirmation to the letters of credit at the beneficiary \ 's request .
The letters of credit were subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits 600 -LRB- 2007 revision -RRB- .
Global does business internationally but has all of its central functions including management , credit and operations in London .
\ r \ n CIMB had security in respect of its liability under the letters of credit pursuant to the assignment by Cashcot of export letters of credit issued by Chinese banks at the request of Cashcot \ 's buyers in respect of which Cashcot were beneficiaries .
By reason of the export letters of credit having expired CIMB is no longer able to obtain payment under the same .
After the documents under the letters of credit had been presented to DB between 22 and 26 February 2016 DB presented the documents to CIMB and made calls for payment .
Between 26 February and 1 March 2016 CIMB notified DB of certain suggested discrepancies in the documents .
On 7 March 2016 DB advised CIMB that Global had informed DB that Cashcot had accepted all the suggested discrepancies .
But on the same day CIMB received an email from Cashcot saying that the discrepancies were not accepted .
CIMB rejected the presentation of documents and refused to reimburse DB in respect of the letters of credit .
\ r \ n On 11 July 2016 CIMB commenced proceedings against Cashcot in Singapore seeking a declaration that CIMB is entitled to an indemnity pursuant to the Facility Letter and the payment of certain sums into an escrow account again pursuant to the Facility Letter .
\ r \ n On 30 August 2016 CIMB commenced proceedings in Singapore against Bhadresh Trading Corporation Ltd. of India who had issued two guarantees of Cashcot \ 's obligations under the Facility Letter .
\ r \ n On 14 October 2016 CIMB obtained from the Singapore court two freezing orders against Cashcot and Bhadrash .
\ r \ n On 25 October 2016 DB commenced proceedings in the Commercial Court in this jurisdiction seeking reimbursement from CIMB of the sums it had paid to Global under the letters of credit .
\ r \ n On 7 November 2016 Cashcot was wound up pursuant to an order of the Singapore Court .
\ r \ n On 25 November 2016 CIMB issued its application for a stay of the English proceedings .
\ r \ n On 9 December 2016 CIMB issued a third set of proceedings in Singapore against Bhadresh , Global and DB -LRB- which has a branch in Singapore -RRB- .
In those proceedings CIMB alleges that Bhadresh , Global and Cashcot conspired to defraud CIMB .
In paragraph 42 of the statement of claim it is alleged that the sale of the cargo to Global and an onward sale of the cargo by Global to Cashcot were sham transactions for the purpose of obtaining payment under the letters of credit at the expense , inter alia , of CIMB .
However , CIMB has joined DB to the proceedings and seeks a declaration that it is not liable to pay DB under the letters of credit because -LRB- a -RRB- the documents were non-compliant and -LRB- b -RRB- CIMB is not liable to pay `` due to the existence of the fraud '' .
The particulars of fraud alleged are that Bhadresh , Global and Cashcot `` conspired to defraud inter alia -LSB- CIMB -RSB- using the Tendered Documents .
This could have been phrased more clearly but I accept that the fraud relied upon is not only the use of doctored or forged documents but also the creation of sham transactions for the purpose of defrauding inter alia CIMB .
\ r \ n In order to obtain a stay of the English proceedings CIMB must show that Singapore is clearly or distinctly more appropriate than England for the trial of DB \ 's claim against CIMB ; see Spiliada Maritime Corp. v Cansulex Ltd. .
-LSB- 1987 -RSB- AC 460 , 475-478 .
\ r \ n The evidence of Mr. Aston , a partner in the firm of Holman Fenwick Willan who act for CIMB , is that the only connecting factors to England are that DB is the London Branch of a German bank and that CIMB , a Malaysian bank , has a branch office in London .
DB \ 's customer Global also appears to have a real presence in London and the documents were tendered by Global to DB in London .
However , the basis upon which it is said that Singapore is clearly and distinctly the more suitable forum is said to be -LRB- i -RRB- that continuation of the English proceedings would involve CIMB in duplicative proceedings , increasing the overall costs burden and giving rise to the risk of inconsistent findings in the two sets of proceedings and -LRB- ii -RRB- that the allegations of fraud involve witnesses and documents that are located in Singapore , India , Hong Kong and China and so very far distant from England .
-LRB- Mr. Aston also said that the proper law of the letters of credit was that of Singapore , but Mr. Griffiths of DB said that no point of law is involved \ xc2 \ x96 the issues being factual - but that if there is an issue of law DB \ 's claim against CIMB is governed by English law .
\ r \ n Duplicate proceedings and risk of inconsistent decisions In considering the first argument it is necessary to bear in mind that it is well established that the contractual relationship between DB as the confirming bank and CIMB as the issuing bank is separate from the relationship between CIMB and its customer .
by Brindle and Cox at para.8-030 and 8-050 .
Until CIMB sought a negative declaration against DB in Singapore on 9 December 2016 there was only one court which was required to decide the question whether CIMB was liable to indemnify DB , namely , this court .
The spectre of duplicative proceedings and inconsistent decisions as between DB and CIMB therefore only came about by reason of the Defendant \ 's decision to sue DB for a negative declaration after proceedings had already been commenced in England by DB against the Defendant .
\ r \ n However , before 9 December 2016 there was a common issue of fact in the earlier Singapore proceedings brought by CIMB against Cashcot and Bhadresh and the later English proceedings brought by DB against CIMB , namely , whether the documents were compliant or not .
It was said that there was a risk of inconsistent findings and reliance was placed on the observation of Brandon LJ .
in the El Amria -LSB- 1981 -RSB- 2 Lloyd \ 's Reports 119 that it would be `` a potential disaster from a legal point of view '' if there were separate trials in London and in Egypt of the same issues of fact -LRB- the London trial being a claim by the cargo receivers against the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board and the Egyptian trial being a proposed action by the receivers against the shipowners ; see p. 128 -RRB- .
It is however to be noted that that observation was made in a case where the most important evidence from surveyors and agronomists was to be found in England .
That factor , coupled with the risk of inconsistent decisions , meant that there were strong reasons for not giving effect to an exclusive jurisdiction clause in favour of Egypt .
In the present case it can not be said that the evidence necessary to decide whether the documents were compliant is to be found in Singapore .
That issue can be decided , possibly with the assistance of expert evidence , in either London or Singapore .
The risk of inconsistent decisions and the duplication of costs on that issue does not point to Singapore being the more appropriate forum .
\ r \ n Further , it was submitted on behalf of DB that having regard to the express obligation in clause 8 of the terms and conditions of the Facility Letter that Cashcot indemnify CIMB the Singapore court will not have to consider the question of documentary compliance in circumstances where the English court has decided that the documents were compliant with the result that CIMB is liable to indemnify DB .
\ r \ n Mr. Fulton , for DB , submitted that a judgment of the English court holding CIMB liable to indemnify DB would enable CIMB to seek an indemnity from Cashcot on the basis that such judgment was `` an expense , loss , damage or liability '' which DB had suffered as a consequence of `` issuing or establishing a L/C at an Obligor \ 's requestor otherwise in connection with the Facilities .
Indeed , it is to be noted that in the Singapore proceedings commenced against Cashcot CIMB sought a declaration that Cashcot indemnify it in respect of `` any expense , loss damage or liability which -LSB- CIMB -RSB- may incur or suffer under any of the Letters of Credit issued by -LSB- CIMB -RSB- pursuant to the Facility Letter .
\ r \ n Mr. Fletcher , for the Defendant , submitted that clause 8 would not assist CIMB without a finding by the Singapore court that the documents were in fact compliant .
Reliance was placed upon the discussion in The Modern Law of Guarantee English Edition by Courtney , Phillips and O \ ` Donovan 3 rd ed .
at paragraphs 5-140 \ xc2 \ x96 144 and Rust Consulting Limited v PB Limited -LSB- 2010 -RSB- EWHC 3243 -LRB- TCC -RRB- at paragraphs 39-45 per Akenhead J .
However , Mr. Fletcher did not refer to the application of that principle of construction in the context of letters of credit and in particular in the context of a clause whereby a bank \ 's customer agreed to indemnify the bank in respect of a liability arising out of the issue of a letter of credit at the request of the customer .
Mr. Fulton submitted that in the context of letters of credit the natural construction of clause 8 is that it extends to and includes a liability established by a judgment as between the issuing and the confirming bank .
\ r \ n It would not be appropriate for this court to seek to determine this issue of construction because it a question to be decided in the litigation between the Defendant and its customer in Singapore .
A similar argument as to the true construction of the Guarantee given by Bhadresh -LRB- in particular clauses 1 -LRB- iii -RRB- and 31 -RRB- will have to be decided in Singapore .
\ r \ n The location of the evidence relating to the fraud allegation Mr. Fletcher told me that CIMB intends , in the English proceedings , to allege not merely that the tendered documents were forged -LRB- and , I assume , that such fraud was known to DB at the material time -RRB- but also that the letters of credit were issued as a result of fraudulent misrepresentations and so are liable to be rescinded or avoided .
He submitted that if those allegations are made out CIMB would not be liable to indemnify DB and in that regard relied upon Solo Industries UK Ltd. v Canara Bank -LRB- CA -RRB- -LSB- 2001 -RSB- 1 WLR 1800 .
Since the evidence establishing the suggested fraud was located in or near Singapore -LRB- and not in or near London -RRB- Singapore was clearly and distinctly a more appropriate forum than London .
That depends upon what was apparent to the Bank from the documents themselves and from such other information as was available to DB at the material time .
That evidence is in London .
The court in Singapore is no better placed to determine that question than is the English court .
Second , with regard to the question whether the letters of credit were issued as a result of fraudulent misrepresentations the evidence with regard to that allegation may be found in or near to Singapore -LRB- and not in or near to London -RRB- but no allegation of fraud is made against DB and since the contractual relationship between DB and CIMB is separate and distinct from the contractual relationship between CIMB and Cashcot and from the contractual relationship between CIMB and Bhadresh , which latter relationships are alleged to have been procured by fraud , there is no basis , as it seems to me , upon which CIMB \ 's liability as issuing bank to indemnify DB as confirming bank can be challenged upon the grounds of fraud .
The fact that CIMB may be able to avoid its contractual relationships with Cashcot and Bhadresh on account of their fraud does not provide CIMB with a defence to DB \ 's claim against it .
There is no suggestion that CIMB rescinded or avoided the contractual relationship between it and DB before DB accepted the documents as compliant and paid Global -LRB- or before such payment was deemed to have been made .
\ r \ n Conclusion I have reached the conclusion , having considered counsel \ 's submissions , that CIMB has not established that Singapore is clearly and distinctly the more appropriate court to determine DB \ 's claim against CIMB .
There is a risk of inconsistent decisions on the question whether the documents were compliant but in circumstances where the documents can be considered by either this court or the Singapore court and the evidence can not be said to be more readily available in Singapore such risk does not make Singapore clearly and distinctly the more appropriate forum .
Similarly , the allegation that the tendered documents were forged to the knowledge of DB when they accepted them as compliant can be considered by either court and the evidence can not be said to be more readily available in Singapore .
The allegation that the letters of credit were issued by CIMB as a result of fraudulent misrepresentations will involve evidence which is likely to be more readily available in Singapore than in London .
But such allegation can not provide CIMB with a defence to the claim brought against it by DB .
\ r \ n It was argued that the Singapore proceedings were `` significantly further advanced than the English proceedings '' and therefore that it is most appropriate that DB \ 's claim be considered by the Singapore court rather than by this court .
This probably means that more has been done in Singapore than in this jurisdiction but I am not persuaded that the Singaporean proceedings are `` significantly further advanced '' .
It is also said that if CIMB has to litigate in both jurisdictions that will involve duplication of cost and effort .
Those matters do not show that Singapore would be clearly and distinctly the more appropriate forum than London .
\ r \ n Finally , it was argued that Singapore is the only forum which can give a single decision binding on all relevant parties .
It is true that all relevant parties are involved in the Singapore proceedings but CIMB could join Bhadresh and Global to the English proceedings as Part 20 defendants .
There might be a problem with Cashcot since it has been wound up ; but then the winding up must equally affect its continued involvement in the Singapore proceedings .
