b'LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: INTRODUCTION This action was begun by writ issued on 14th April 1993 in the Commercial Court .
The First Plaintiff, Grupo Torras SA (Grupo Torras) is a Spanish company; the Second Plaintiff, Torras Hostench London Ltd. (Torras London), is its English subsidiary .
The Plaintiffs claim damages for fraudulent conspiracy, monies alleged to be due under constructive trust, and damages for breach of duty by directors of the Plaintiff companies .
The personal Defendants are officers of or professional advisers to the Plaintiff companies; they are said to have engineered or facilitated the frauds .
The 15th to 20th Defendants are offshore companies provided by the professional advisers for the purpose, it is said, of carrying out the frauds .
All but one of the Defendants (the Fourth Defendant, Walid Edmond Moukarzel) challenged the jurisdiction of the Court, seeking to set aside or stay the proceedings under RSC Order 12, rule 8 or pursuant to the inherent jurisdiction .
The central question is where should the Plaintiffs\' claims be tried, in England, as the Plaintiffs contend, or in Spain, as the Defendants contend .
Mr Justice Mance rejected the challenge of all the Defendants, save in the case of the claim of Grupo Torras against Coll & Company Ltd. where the proceedings have been stayed pursuant to an arbitration clause .
Save for the Second Defendant, Richard Robinson, they have all appealed against the decision of the Judge .
The Parties: The Kuwait Investment Office {\'KIO\') is a branch of the Kuwait Investment Authority established in Kuwait and has as its function the management of investment of funds belonging to the Government of Kuwait .
KIO is based in London .
It has a number of subsidiary companies in various parts of the world, including, through the medium of holding companies, Koolmees Holdings BV (\'Koolmees\') and Kokmeeuw Holdings BV (\'Kokmeeuw\'), both Dutch companies which owned shares in Grupo Torras .
Grupo Torras is incorporated in Spain and is indirectly controlled by KIO .
Through subsidiary companies it operated in various sectors of the Spanish economy .
Since 10 December 1992 it has been in a state of suspension of payments under Spanish law .
Torras London is a wholly owned subsidiary of Grupo Torras; at the material time it was substantially managed from Spain .
The First Defendant, Sheikh Fahad Mohammed Al Sabah was until 8 April 1992, the chairman of KIO .
Until 26 May 1992 he was the chairman of Koolmees and Kokmeeuw and a director and President of Grupo Torras .
He was served with the proceedings under RSC Order 11 in the Bahamas; but the Judge held that he was domiciled in England and could have been served in England .
He was represented both before Mance J. and in this Court by Mr. McCaughran .
Messrs de la Rosa, Soler, Nunez, de Mir and Pique were together referred to as the \'Spanish Defendants\', being domiciled in Spain .
At the [material time, Mr de la Rosa was a director and vice-President of Grupo Torras, and was alleged to have been the most senior and active individual controlling Grupo Torras and Torras London\'s business .
Mr Soler was Director of Finance of Torras London .
Mr. Nunez was the Managing Director of Grupo Torras .
Mr de Mir was a director of Grupo Torras and is said to have worked closely with Mr de la Rosa .
Mr Pique is a lawyer who was the company secretary of Grupo Torras until 26 May 1992 .
Before Mance J. the \'Spanish Defendants\' were represented by Lord Irvine QC and Mr Briggs QC and on appeal to this Court by Mr Briggs .
Mr Robinson, Mr Jaffar and Mr Moukarzel were domiciled in England .
Mr Jaffar was Deputy Chairman and General Manager of KIO until 20 April 1990, a director of Koolmees and Kokmeeuw until 15 March 1990, and at all material times Vice-President and a director of Grupo Torras .
He was not separately represented on the appeal, but adopted the submissions of the other appellants .
Mr Folchi is a Spanish lawyer domiciled in Spain .
He is said to have been a director of Grupo Torras and signatory to its bank accounts from about 1 October 1990 .
He became secretary to the Board of Grupo Torras on 1 May 1992 .
His position is on all fours with that of the \'Spanish Defendants\' .
Mr Coll is an accountant of British nationality who lives in Spain .
His services are said to have been supplied to Grupo Torras through Coll & Company Ltd. ("Coll & Co."), an English company .
Mr Russell is also an accountant; he lives in Jersey and practices as a partner of Russell Limebeer .
The remaining corporate Defendants were provided by the various professional advisers .
Croesus International Ltd and Wantley Developments Ltd are Gibraltar companies provided by Mr Coll .
Wardbase Developments Ltd (an English company), Oakthorn Ltd (a Jersey company), Westow Ltd and Anslow Ltd (both Isle of Man companies), were provided by or associated with Mr. Russell .
Coggia 1 BV and Riquel BV are Dutch companies apparently provided by Mr. Folchi and Russell Limebeer .
These Defendants were collectively referred to as the Lawrence Graham Defendants, after the name of their solicitors .
They were represented by Mr .
Onions .
For jurisdiction purposes the Defendants fall into three groups - (A)   Those domiciled and served within the jurisdiction in accordance with Article 2 of the Convention Scheduled to the Civil Jurisdiction & Judgments Act 1982 as amended by the Civil Jurisdiction & Judgments Act 1982 (Amendment) Order 1990 (SI 1990 No .
2591) , the Brussels Convention .
This group included Mr Robinson, Mr Jaffar, Mr Moukarzel, Coll & Co. and Wardbase .
They were all served on 15 April 1993 .
(B)   Those domiciled in other Contracting States under the Convention .
These included the \'Spanish Defendants\' and Mr Folchi and Mr Coll, who were served on various dates between 21 June and 1 October 1993 .
It also included Coggia and Riquel, served in June 1993 .
(C) Those domiciled outside the jurisdiction of any of the Contracting States (the 0.11 Defendants) .
This group included the remainder of the Lawrence Graham Defendants and Sheikh Fahad .
Leave to serve was granted on 29 April 1993 under 0.11 r.l(l)(f) - "claim founded on a tort and the damage was sustained, or resulted from an act committed, within the jurisdiction" - and under 0.11 r.l(l)(c) on the basis that they were necessary and proper parties to the claim brought against Defendants within the jurisdiction .
The Plaintiffs\' Claims: The Plaintiffs\' claims relate to four separate but interrelated transactions .
It is unnecessary to describe these transactions in detail .
In outline they were as follows: 1 .
Croesus: In May 1988 Us $27.4 million at the request of Mr de la Rosa and Mr Jaffar was transferred by KIO to Grupo Torras .
The money was transferred through KlO\'s subsidiaries, including Kokmeeuw, to the Republic National Bank of New York for "the account of Merrill Lynch Bank Suisse" to a numbered account .
From there the money disappeared without trace .
The Judge described it as the first \'black hole\' .
It is alleged that this payment was not for the benefit of the Plaintiffs .
In September 1989, Banco Santander, at the request of Torras London, transferred US $25 million to Kokmeeuw in \'partial repayment\' of the transfer of US $27.4 million to the Republic National Bank .
It is then alleged that the payment was concealed by a series of sham documents and transactions, notably a sham loan agreement by Torras London to Croesus, with extensions, a guarantee of the \'loan\' signed by Mr Nunez on behalf of Grupo Torras .
It is said that finally the \'loan\' was accounted for by way of intercompany set-off between Grupo Torras and Torras London, and then written off in the Grupo Torras 1990 profit and loss account .
The balance of the US $27.4 million, plus interest, was covered by a payment of US $2,576,707 by Torras London and later reimbursed by Grupo Torras to Torras London .
This is alleged to have been concealed by a sham invoice from Wantley to Torras London claiming payment for services which Wantley never did or could provide .
2 .
Oakthorn: This operation related to two payments made to Oakthorn by Torras London of US $55 million in July 1989 and US $50 million in June 1990 .
The Plaintiffs assert that these \'loans\' were never intended to be repaid; they were again covered by a series of sham documents, purporting to show genuine loans and guarantees .
For the most part the money has vanished in the second \'black hole\'; but the Plaintiffs have succeeded in tracing some of the money .
Of the US $55 million, $7.5 million is said to have been traced to an account in Mr Jaffar\'s name in a Bank in Zurich; smaller sums to companies associated with Mr Russell .
As to the US $50 million, $10 million is said to have been traced to Mr Jaffar\'s Zurich Bank, $22.5 million to an account controlled by Sheikh Fahad in a bank in London and $15.49 million to the account of a company in Jersey of which Mr Russell is a signatory and whose address is the same as Russell Limebeer .
3 .
Pincinco: Under a Fiduciary Agreement dated 2 October 1990, Torras London through Banco Santander (Suiza) SA deposited US $300 million with Bankers Trust AG, Geneva and the latter agreed for a fee/commission of $2.1 million to make, and did an 3 October 1990 make, a loan of US $300 million to Pincinco at Torras London\'s risk and expense .
Pincinco is a Jersey company now in liquidation of which Mr Russell was company secretary and now a liquidator .
The US $300 million was funded by an agreement dated 1 October 1990 between Mr Folchi for Koolmees and Mr de la Rosa for Grupo Torras, pursuant to which Koolmees agreed to lend, and on 4 October 1990 did advance, Ptas .
40 billion to Grupo Torras .
This advance was capitalized in July 1991 .
Grupo Torras was thus able to transfer some US $410 million to Banco San-tander for value date 5 October 1991, out of which the US $300 million was paid to Pincinco .
As to the remainder $107 million was returned to Grupo Torras on 24 October 1990 .
The US $300 million was not intended to be repaid by Pincinco from its own funds and was not paid to Pincinco for the benefit of Grupo Torras or Torras London .
It represents the third \'black hole\' .
An extremely complex cover up scheme is alleged to have been set up to conceal the true nature of this arrangement .
It is unnecessary to say more than that again the \'loans\' or \'transactions\' are said to be sham .
Since the hearing before Mance J. the Plaintiffs claim to have traced US $105 million of the Pincinco money to an account owned and controlled by Mr de la Rosa .
4 .
Wardbase: On 26 May 1992 Ptas .
2 billion was transferred by Grupo Torras to Torras London in Barcelona and then by Torras London to an account in the name of Wardbase in London .
On the same day Wardbase transferred Ptas .
1.96 billion (on the evidence via Oakthorn) to Anslow in the Isle of Man .
This constitutes the fourth \'black hole\' .
The payment of Ptas .
2 billion is said not to have been for the benefit of Torras London or Grupo Torras .
It is said to have been made pursuant to a purported invoice dated 24 April 1992 from Wardbase to a subsidiary of Grupo Torras called Torraspapel SA, of which Messrs de la Rosa and Folchi were officers, referring to a purported agreement of 4 September 1989, both of which are said to have been sham .
The Plaintiffs are alleged as a result to have suffered a loss of Ptas .
2 billion .
It is unnecessary to set out the parts played by each of the personal Defendants in these various transactions .
Not all were involved in all four transactions .
Sheikh Fahad is said to have been central to all of them .
The case against the personal Defendants is that they each played a part in securing or facilitating payments which they knew were not for the benefit of the Plaintiffs and in the cover up operations, either as officers or employees of either or both of the Plaintiffs or as their professional advisers .
The corporate Defendants, other than Coll & Co., were either the recipients of the payments, the vehicles through which they were made or were otherwise used by those controlling them to conceal the truth by a web of false documentation .
The Plaintiffs\' claim is based on conspiracy to injure, constructive trust and breach of duty by directors and officers of the Plaintiffs .
The Proceedings before Mance J.: The proceedings before Mance J. lasted 25 days and led to a judgment extending to 174 pages in which the Judge carefully went through the points which had been argued before him .
Much of the time was taken up by submissions on behalf of the Defendants that there were no serious issues to be tried .
Save in respect of the claim of Torras London in the Wardbase transaction, where the Judge held that Torras London had no arguable claim to have been the victim of a conspiracy or to have suffered loss, he rejected those submissions .
We find it difficult to see how it could properly have been argued at such length that there was no serious issue to be tried: (See  Seaconsar v. Bank Markasi  [1994] 1 AC 438 at p.455, where Lord Goff of Chieveley indicated that the issue of the merits should net be debated at length) .
It was also contended on behalf of the Defendants that there had been material non-disclosure on the part of the Plaintiffs in obtaining leave under Order 11 .
Again the Judge rejected these submissions .
Neither of these two aspects of the case formed any part of the appeal .
The issues which are relevant to this appeal arose from the arguments of the Defendants under the Brussels Convention and Order 11 .
Under the Convention the Defendants advanced three arguments: First, they argued that the "object" of the proceedings was the "decisions of [the] organs" of Grupo Torras and that Article 16(2) of the Convention required that the courts of Spain, being the Contracting State in which Grupo Torras has its seat, have exclusive jurisdiction .
If this argument succeeded, the English court would wholly have to decline jurisdiction .
Secondly they argued that the proceedings involved "the same cause of action" and were "between the same parties" as proceedings which were pending before the Spanish courts and that Article 21 of the Convention required the English court to decline, or at the least defer, jurisdiction in favour of the Spanish courts as the English court was not the court "first seized" .
At the time that Mance J had to give his decision the European Court of Justice had not delivered its judgment in  The Maciej Rataj  (C-406/92: 6th December 1994,  [1994] EUECJ C-406/92 ) .
It is accepted that the effect of that judgment is that Article 21 only applies to the extent that the parties before the respective courts are the same and "it does not prevent the proceedings from continuing between the other parties", (para.34) The Defendants sought to rely alternatively or cumulatively upon two sets of Spanish proceedings .
One was begun by a  querella  filed by Grupo Torras on 8th January 1993 .
These proceedings are primarily criminal but, in common with some other continental jurisdictions, it is open to the court under Spanish procedural law within the ambit of those proceedings to give a civil judgment for compensation to be paid to a person who has suffered loss or injury as a result of conduct which the court has adjudged to be criminal .
There are various ways in which criminal proceedings may be instituted before the Spanish courts; the  querella  is a form of complaint which is consistent with the court in due course exercising the power to give a civil judgment in favour of Grupo Torras .
It is however possible for the complainant to reserve the civil claim to be exercised separately .
The Defendants argued that, for the purposes of Article 21, the parties to these Spanish criminal proceedings included Sheikh Fahad and messrs Jaffar, de la Rosa, de Mir, Nunez, Folchi and Soler .
They submitted that the English court should decline jurisdiction as between Grupo Torras and all these Defendants .
The other set of Spanish proceedings were the civil action originally filed by a Spanish company called Quail Espana SA in June 1992 against Grupo Torras .
Quail was owned and controlled by Messrs de la Rosa and de Mir and had a service agreement with Grupo Torras .
It took the form of a jactitation action alleging injurious falsehood on the part of Grupo Torras in relation to the performance of the agreement .
On 19th May these proceedings were amended to add as plaintiffs messrs de la Rosa, de Mir, Nunez, Folchi and Soler and to claim declarations of regularity in relation to (among other things) the four transactions which by then were the subject of the English action .
This action has, for convenience, been referred to as the \'Quail\' action .
The Defendants submit that the English court should also, as between Grupo Torras and the Quail Plaintiffs, decline jurisdiction in favour of the Spanish court .
The third argument of the Defendants was that the totality of the English action and the two Spanish proceedings were "related" actions, that is to say, "actions which are so closely related that it is expedient to hear and determine them together to avoid the risk of irreconcilable judgments", and the English court, not being the court first seized, should therefore apply Article 22 and stay the whole of the action .
This argument potentially applied to the whole of the action without making any distinction between the parties but, like Article 21, only applies if the English court is not the court "first seized" .
The other points taken by the Defendants before the Judge were based upon Order 11 or the inherent jurisdiction .
Thus it was argued that England was not an appropriate forum and that Spain was the appropriate forum .
The Court should refuse to exercise its discretion under 0.11 and should stay the remainder of the proceedings .
The length of the proceedings before Mance J was further added to by the parties adducing extensive oral evidence from Spanish lawyers who were examined and cross-examined over a number of days .
The decision of the Judge was as we have said to reject (subject to an immaterial qualification) the applications of the Defendants .
He held that Article 16(2) did not apply .
He held that for a number of reasons neither of the Spanish proceedings came within the terms of Article 21 .
He held that the English court was the court first seized .
He accordingly held that Article 22 did not apply .
He held that England was in all the circumstances the appropriate forum for the trial of the various disputes raised by the action .
The Issues on the Appeal: The arguments which are advanced on this appeal by the Defendants are - (1}  That the Court should decline jurisdiction under Article 16(2) .
(2)   That Che Court should decline jurisdiction under Article 21 in relation to the common parties on the basis of - (a)   The  Querella  proceedings, (b)   The Quail action .
(3)   That the Court should stay the action under Article 22 .
(4)   That, if the Court accedes to the application under Article 21, or only accedes in part to the applications under Articles 16(2) or 22, the Court should decline to exercise its discretion under O.li, or should stay, the remainder of the action .
The Appellants did not therefore seek to challenge the exercise of the Judge\'s discretion, if he was right about Articles 16(2), 21 and 22 .
They argued that, if the result of the -application of those Articles was that any part of this litigation should be referred to Spain, then it was appropriate that the whole of the litigation should go there .
They were prepared to submit to the jurisdiction of the Spanish court where that was necessary .
The Article 16(2) point is free-standing .
The Article 21 and 22 points are inter-related as they both raise the question whether the English court was the court first seized .
This is a question partly of European law (the Convention), partly of English procedural law (when was the English court seized of the action? .
and partly a question of fact when under Spanish procedural law the Spanish courts became seized of the proceedings before them .
As a preliminary in this Court, the Appellants submitted that the Court should refer suggested questions of the construction of the Convention to the European Court for their opinion .
They also submitted that the Court should adjourn the appeal so that the Spanish courts could, in some unspecified way, give a decision upon what the Appellants submitted were the issues of Spanish law necessary to the determination of this appeal .
We declined to accede to either of these submissions until we had heard further argument from the parties upon the Appeal; having heard full argument, we are of the opinion that nothing on this appeal turns upon any question of the construction of the Convention not covered by the Judgments already given by the European Court nor upon any question of Spanish law which is not clearly covered by the evidence already adduced .
We have therefore not acceded to either submission .
There were further in any event serious objections to acceding to the application in relation to Spanish law .
ARTICLE 16{2) Article 16 provides: "The following courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction, regardless of domicile: 1(a) in proceedings which have as their object rights in rem in immovable property or tenancies ...., the courts of the Contracting State in which the property is situated; (b)  ...... 2 .
In proceedings which have as their object the validity of the constitution, the nullity or the dissolution of companies or other legal persons or associations of natural c-r legal persons, or the decisions of their organs, the courts of the Contracting State in which the company, legal person or association has its seat .
3 .
In proceedings which have as their object the validity of entries in public registers ......., the courts of the Contracting State where the register is kept .
4 .
[patents etc] ... 5 .
[judgments] ..." Before Mance J, the Defendants submitted that a broad and purposive construction should be given to the Article, and in particular that the word \'validity\' did not govern the words \'decisions of their organs\' .
They said that the proceedings were principally concerned with the decisions of Grupo Torras, its officers and shareholders, and consequently the Spanish Courts should have exclusive jurisdiction .
Mance J- did not accept their submissions .
On the question of the construction of the Article; he preferred to follow Knox J. in  Newtherapeutic Ltd v Katz  [1991] Ch .
226 .
But he also held that, even adopting the Defendants\' broad construction, the case did not come within Article 16 (2) .
It is accepted that the words "proceedings which have as their object" in this Article mean "proceedings which have as their subject-matter" or "proceedings which are principally concerned with" .
This approach to Article 16 is well established and is illustrated by such decisions as  Rossler v Rottwinkel  (241/83,  [1985] EUECJ R-241/83 )  [1986] QB 33  and  Webb v Webb  (294/92,  [1994] EUECJ C-294/92 ) [1994] ECR 1717 .
There has, however, been debate about how the remainder of Article 16(2) should be read: whether it is concerned with proceedings which have as their subject-matter "the decisions of their organs" or "the validity of ... the decisions of their organs" .
The grammar of the English text suggests the former, but the French, German and Italian texts all point unequivocally to the latter, and the Dutch text has been similarly interpreted by an academic writer .
The narrower interpretation is supported by Dicey and Morris Conflict of Laws 12th .
ed .
Vol 1 p. 383; O\'Malley and Layton European Civil Practice p. 533; the explanation of the Article given in the Jenard Report (the preceding paragraph merely reproduces the text of the English version and is without significance); and the decision of Knox J in  New-therapeutics v Katz Ltd  [1991] Ch .
226 .
We doubt that this question is of any real significance, partly because the correct approach to the interpretation of the Convention is purposive rather than textual, and partly because we doubt that the word "validity" is to be narrowly construed so as to exclude consideration of the meaning and effect of decisions of the relevant organs .
We are, however, satisfied that it is not necessary for us to resolve the question on this appeal; we agree with the Judge that on either reading of the Article the present case clearly falls outside it .
The paragraphs of Article 16 constitute a series of exceptions to the basic jurisdictional rules established by the Convention .
The objective of Article 16(2) is to confer exclusive jurisdiction to decide questions concerning the constitution and internal management of a company on the courts of the Contracting State in which the company has its seat .
It is generally accepted as a matter of private international law that the law of the place of incorporation determines the capacity of the company, the composition and powers of the various organs of the company, the formalities and procedures laid down for them, the extent of an individual member\'s liability for the debts and liabilities of the company, and other matters of that kind .
The objective of Article 16(2) is to confer exclusive jurisdiction to determine all such questions on the courts of the state where the company has its seat .
The other paragraphs of the Article follow a similar logic .
The Appellants submit that Article 16(2) governs all questions which are concerned with the internal management of a company, and that this extends to all disputes which arise out of the relationship between the company and its officers or shareholders or between its shareholders and officers, and possibly even between its shareholders  inter se  .
This submission is far too wide .
Whether an action falls within Article 16(2) depends upon its subject matter - the nature of the dispute - not upon the relationship between the parties .
A claim by an officer of a company for wrongful dismissal, for example, does not fall within the Article, though a claim that the decision to dismiss him had been taken by a meeting of the board which was inquorate would do so .
In  Newtherapeutics Ltd v Katz  Knox J drew a distinction between validity and propriety .
He was concerned with an action in which it was alleged that officers of the company had acted in excess of their powers (i) because they had acted without the authority of a properly convened and quorate board meeting and (ii) because the transaction to which they had committed the company was so detrimental to the interests of the company that no reasonable board of directors could properly have assented to it .
Knox J held that the first of these issues fell within Article 16 (2) but that the second did not .
We agree with him that the first issue plainly fell within the scope of the Article, but we should wish to reserve for future consideration the correctness of his decision that the second did not .
The powers of directors and other officers of a company are limited not only by formal or procedural requirements but also by the general principle that officers of a company must act .bona fide in the interests of the company .
Allegations of the kind made in  Newtherapeutics Ltd v Katz  are essentially allegations of want of authority, and there is much force in the contention that they fall within the scope of Article 16(2) .
Want or excess of authority, however, is one thing, abuse of authority is quite another .
Honest but misguided directors who faithfully record their actions and purpose and, conducting themselves openly as the appropriate organ of the company, commit the company to a transaction which they mistakenly believe to be for its benefit, may be liable for acting beyond the scope of their authority if the transaction is not and could not reasonably be thought to be in the company\'s interest .
But that is not the present case .
The Plaintiffs allege that the Defendants, or those of them who were in a position to do so assisted by the others, misappropriated enormous sums of the Plaintiffs\' money by procuring sums to be paid into offshore bank accounts set up to disguise the identity of the recipients, without the Plaintiffs receiving any benefit from the payments, and that they arranged for the true nature of the transactions to be concealed from the Plaintiffs and their auditors by a series of complicated but sham accounting transactions .
As a result of interlocutory proceedings, the destination of some of the money has been identified .
Very large sums have found their way to the First, Third and Fifth Defendants or offshore companies controlled by them, and substantial sums have been expended by them on maintaining luxurious lifestyles or funding private business enterprises of their own .
Such a case has nothing whatever to do with any decisions of the Plaintiffs\' organs .
If the Plaintiffs\' allegations are true (and on an earlier interlocutory application Steyn LJ has acknowledged that they are supported by prima facie evidence of a sophisticated fraud), those of the Defendants who were officers of the Plaintiffs were not acting openly and honestly as organs and for the benefit of the Plaintiffs, but secretly and dishonestly for their own personal benefit and in fraud of the Plain tiffs .
Had such Defendants been only some of the persons who composed the organs of the Plaintiffs, it would have been clear beyond argument that in misappropriating the Plaintiffs\' money they were not acting as organs of the Plaintiffs but in fraud of those organs .
What would have been in issue would have been, not the decisions of the organs, but the deceit of the Defendants in procuring those decisions to be made .
This does not cease to be the case because all the persons who together constitute the organs of the Plaintiffs are charged with responsibility for the misappropriations .
The Appellants insist that the individual responsibilities of the principal Defendants consist in large measure of duties owed to Grupo Torras by its officers under Spanish law; the Plaintiffs have alleged the breach by the director defendants of their duties as directors .
But this still does not make the subject matter of the action the decisions of organs of Grupo Torras .
The action is concerned with the Defendants\' alleged misappropriation of the company\'s money .
Grupo Torras\'s only role was to be the victim of the alleged conspiracy; it is impossible to accept the proposition that in misappropriating its money the alleged conspirators were acting as its agents or organs, let alone that "decisions" of its organs were involved .
It was contended before Mance J, but only faintly before us, that the questions whether the Plaintiffs suffered any loss and whether the Defendants\' acts were authorised, ratified and financed by the ultimate controlling shareholders involve questions of Spanish company law and fall within .Article 16(2) .
They advanced an argument that the Plaintiffs had not suffered any loss on at least three of the transactions because the relevant money had originated from loans by Koolmees to Grupo Torras and in July 1991, at an extraordinary shareholders meeting of Grupo Torras, it was resolved to capitalise the loans by issuing additional share capital to Koolmees in satisfaction for the liability to repay the loans .
The Defendants argued that this capitalisation made good to Grupo Torras the loss it would otherwise have suffered on the Croesus, Oakthorn and Pincinco transactions and notwithstanding that the Defendants had (on the Plaintiffs\' case) fraudulently deprived the Plaintiffs of the money advanced by Koolmees .
The submission is not only inconsistent with the decision of this Court in  re The Anglo-French Co-operative Society, ex parte Pelly  (1882) 21 Ch.D .
292 but is inherently absurd .
The provision of loan capital and its conversion into share capital are self-contained commercial transactions in which the company gives and receives value .
By themselves they are incapable of mitigating or avoiding the loss which the company sustained by the theft of its funds .
The Appellants have also asserted that their defalcations were authorised and ratified by the controlling shareholders .
But they have put forward no case of authorisation or ratification beyond alleging that what they did was done with the knowledge and approval of the First Defendant, whose own complicity in the fraud is evidenced by a substantial volume of material .
It cannot seriously be suggested that there was any informed approval or ratification by the Plaintiffs of the payments, the true nature of which was concealed from the Plaintiffs and their auditors throughout and which has been pieced together only by the most laborious and time-consuming investigations in the course of the present litigation .
The subject matter of this action remains the frauds which it is alleged that the Defendants have practised on the Plaintiff companies .
The object of these proceedings is not decisions of the organs of Grupo Torras (nor, for that matter, of Torras London) .
Accordingly, even on the construction of Article 16(2) contended for by the Defendants, the present proceedings clearly fall outside it .
Article 16(2} does not debar the English courts from assuming jurisdiction in respect of the present action .
ARTICLE 21 Articles 21 and 22 provide: "21 .
Where proceedings involving the same cause of action and between the same parties are brought in the courts of different Contracting States, any court other than the court first seised shall of its own motion stay its proceedings until such time as the jurisdiction of the court first seised is established .
Where the jurisdiction of the court first seised is established, any court other than the court first seised shall decline jurisdiction in favour of that court .
22 .
Where related actions are brought in the courtB of different Contracting States, any court other than the court first seised may, while the actions are pending at first instance, stay its proceedings .
A court other than the court first Eeised may also, on the application of one of the parties, decline jurisdiction if the law of that court permits the consolidation of related actions and the court first seised has jurisdiction over both actions .
For the purposes of this Article, actions are deemed to be related where they are so closely connected that it is expedient to hear and determine them together to avoid the riek of irreconcilable judgments resulting from separate proceedings. .
Chronology As previously stated, the application of these Articles requires that the court determine whether or not it is the court first seized, it is therefore helpful at the outset to list the dates upon which steps were taken in the relevant actions, this action in England and the criminal, guerelJa, proceedings and the Quail action in Spain .
9/6/92 Original Quail proceedings filed 26/1/33 Judge Moreiras orders the no-admission of the criminal proceedings on the application of Mr de la Rosa) 19/2/33 Judge Moreiras confirms non-admission of the criminal proceedings ("after further intervention by Sheikh Fahad and Mr Jaffar 14/4/93 English writ issued 15/4/93 English writ served within jurisdiction on Jaffar, Robinson, Moukarzel, Coll & Co. and Wardbase 7/5/33 Missing documentation lodged by Quail in original Quail proceedings 12/5/33 Original Quail proceedings admitted 17-8/5/93 English writ served on Anslow, Westow, Croesus, Wantley, Russell, Limebeer and Oakthorn 1P/5/93 Quail proceedings amended by adding de la Rosa, de Mir, Nunez, Folchi and Soler 21/5/93-15/6/93 English writ served on Russell, Sheikh Fahad, Riquel and Coggia 18/6/93 Amended Quail proceedings admitted 21/6/93 English writ served on de la Rosa, de Mir, Soler, Coll and Folchi 3/7/93 Criminal proceedings again not admitted 1/10/93 Amended Quail proceedings served on Grupo Torras 1/10/93 English writ served on Pique 15/11/93 English writ served on Nunez 11/2/34 Audiencia National orders that the criminal proceedings be admitted [29/4/34 Judge Foncillas stays  the  Quail  proceedings pending the resolution of the   criminal proceedings] The Expert Evidence of Spanish Law: A vast amount of evidence of Spanish law was adduced before the Judge .
On behalf of the Defendants, Professor Rifa gave evidence in relation to the criminal/civil proceedings and Dr. Carreras in relation to the Quail proceedings; their written opinions and reports extend to 170 pages and their oral evidence extended over five days .
In reply, Professor Ramos gave evidence on behalf of the Plaintiffs .
His reports extend to 190 pages and his oral evidence took four days .
It is evident that the Judge was greatly concerned at the inordinate time and expense involved in deciding the question of fact, when would the Spanish Courts consider that the criminal/civil proceedings and the amended Quail proceedings were definitively pending for the purpose of Article 21 of the Convention .
But he found himself powerless to control the exuberance of the parties .
This question is not one that has so far confronted the Spanish Courts, although they are familiar with the concept of  lis alibi pendens  for the purpose of domestic law .
The Judge made findings in relation to Spanish law and on the question of when the proceedings would be regarded as definitively pending .
The Appellants challenge his findings in relation to both the criminal/civil proceedings and also the amended Quail proceedings .
They also criticised the basis on which he had made his findings of fact regarding Spanish law .
They submitted that he had not had regard to the fact that Doth the content of the foreign law and how the foreign court would interpret and apply it were matters of evidence .
They said that he had substituted his own view for those of the expert witnesses and had been over-influenced by English authority .
Questions of foreign law are questions of fact which must be proved to the satisfaction of the Judge .
If the evidence of expert witnesses conflicts, it is the Judge\'s duty to resolve these differences in the same way as he must in the case of other conflicting evidence of fact: ( Bumper Corporation v Commissioner of Police of the Metropo lis  [1991] 1 WLR 1362, p.l368F-G) .
The Judge is free to scrutinise the witness and what he says as cm any other issue of fact and can use his common sense to reject the evidence of an expert witness if what he says is patently absurd or inconsistent with the rest of his evidence .
However, where the evidence of an expert witness on foreign law is not contradicted, the Judge should be reluctant to reject it: ( Sharif v Azad  [1967] 1 QB 605 per Diplock LJ at p.616B) .
The Court of Appeal should in appropriate cases be more ready to question the judge\'s conclusions on an issue of foreign law than it is on other questions of fact .
But it should be extremely reluctant to substitute its own views where questions of credibility are concerned, since the Judge has had the benefit of seeing and hearing the witnesses: ( Parkasho v Singh  [1968] P 233 at p.250;  Dalmia Dairy Industries Ltd v National Bank of Pakistan  [1978] 2 Lloyds 233 per Megaw LJ at p.286) .
There was a conflict of evidence before the Judge; he was not obliged to accept the evidence of any witness in its entirety; the findings which he made do not disclose an improper approach to the expert evidence .
Although it will be necessary to consider the correctness of one of his findings, we do not accept the criticisms which have been made of the Judge\'s treatment of the expert evidence of Spanish law .
The Decision of Mance J As previously stated, Mance J had to give his decision without the benefit of the Judgment of the European Court in  Maciej Rataj  .
His decision on the question whether, for the purposes of Article 21, the proceedings were between the same parties was therefore, on any view, reached on the wrong basis and must be reconsidered .
He set out his reasons for not applying Article 21 separately in relation to the Spanish criminal proceedings and in relation to the Quail action .
In relation to the criminal proceedings he said (p.101): " (i)  civil proceedings are pending within the scope of the Spanish criminal proceedings; (ii) they were not definitively pending before their admission on llth February 1994; (iii) it follows from conclusion (ii) that there is no basis for applying Article 21 or 23 since the present action was the first action definitively pending; (iv) the Spanish civil proceedings are not between the same parties (or, if this be the test, between substantially the same parties) as the present English action within the meaning of Article 21 - this follows from my general conclusion that the two sets of proceedings should be compared overall; (v) (a) the Spanish civil proceedings do not involve the same (or substantially the same) cause of action as the present English action; \xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0(b) if they had done, I would have been prepared to allow Grupo Torras to make a reservation in respect of the four transactions in the Spanish criminal proceedings; (vi) apart from conclusion {ii), conclusions (iii) and (iv) would still make Article 21 inapplicable. .
It is accepted that his reason under (iv) cannot stand and that it is still necessary to consider as between the parties common to both the criminal proceedings and the English action - Grupo Torras, Sheikh Fahad and Messrs de la Rosa, de Mir, Nunez, Folchi and Soler - whether Article 21 applies .
In relation to the Quail action he said [at p.124); " (i) the original and amended Quail proceedings fall to be regarded as separate proceedings for the purposes of Articles 21 and 22; (ii) the original Quail proceedings became definitively pending upon their admission on 12th May 1993;  the amended Quail proceedings became definitively pending when admitted on 18th June 1993; (iii) both such dates post-date the English court\'s definitive seizure of the present action on 15th April 1993, applying the view which I take of definitive seizure under English law; (iv) Neither the original nor the amended Quail proceedings is between the same or (substantially the same) parties as the present action - again this follows from my conclusion that the two sets of proceedings fall to be compared overall; (v) on an overall comparison .... there is no identity of causes of action .... if it were right to look solely at the position as between GT and the co-plaintiffs to the amended  Quail  proceedings, the amended Quail proceedings would in this respect involve the same cause of action between the game parties. .
It is thus the amended Quail proceedings that are directly relevant .
As Mance J has held, they are to a certain extent between the same parties and involve the same cause of action .
The critical question therefore becomes which court was first seized .
The Convention: As stated in its preamble, the primary purpose of the Brussels Convention is to give effect to Article 220 of the Treaty of Rome and "secure the simplification of formalities governing the reciprocal recognition and enforcement of judgments of courts or tribunals" in Contracting States .
The provisions for the recognition and enforcement of judgments are contained in Title III of the Convention .
Article 26 provides: "A judgment given in a Contracting State shall be recognised in the other Contracting states without any special procedure being required. .
Article 27 contains certain exceptions to this principle which broadly correspond to recognised aspects of private international law .
Paragraph 3 provides: "If the judgment is irreconcilable with a judgment given in a dispute between the same parties in the State in which recognition is sought. .
There is a similar provision in paragraph 5 for res judicata arising from an earlier judgment of a non-contracting state .
Title II of the Convention deals with jurisdiction .
This is a necessary corollary of Title III .
In particular, provision is required to reduce the risk of conflicting judgments being given in different Contracting States and so raising problems for the mutual recognition of judgments .
Title II acknowledges that it is possible for the courts of more than one State to have jurisdiction in relation to a given matter and that an action may properly be commenced in the courts of more than one State .
Under Article 6, a defendant maybe joined in an action properly commenced in one Contracting State even though that defendant is domiciled in another State (para.l); third party proceedings and counterclaims are permitted (paras.2&3} .
It is therefore possible that there may at one time be pending in the courts of more than one State actions which will give rise to the risk of inconsistent judgments, either in the strict conflicts sense of res judicata or in a looser sense .
These are the subject of Articles 21 and 22 in Section 8, which is headed: " Lis pendens  - related actions" .
Whilst the problem of conflicting judgments with which these two articles are dealing is the same, the subject matter of the two articles is different .
Article 21 applies to "proceedings involving the same cause of action and between the same parties"; Article 22 applies to "related actions", that is to say actions which, whether or not they involve any of the same parties or causes of action, should sensibly be tried together so as to avoid the "risk of irreconcilable judgments" .
It is only Article 21 which directly corresponds with article 27.3 .
This relationship was emphasised in  Gubisch Maschinenfabrik KG v Giulio Palumbo  .
(144/86)  [1987] ECR 4861 ; the court stressed that Article .
21 was concerned with  lis pendens  as defined in the article, not as previously understood in the domestic law of any individual Contracting State .
Article 22 involves the exercise of a discretion; in contrast, the provisions of Article 21 are mandatory and require the relevant court to "decline jurisdiction" either immediately or ultimately .
But both articles adopt a common approach and apply the game criterion .
They apply a criterion of temporal priority and use the phrase "the court first seized" .
The court which is first seized is not affected and is entitled to proceed; any other court is required to observe the requirements of the articles .
The meaning of the phrase "the court first seized" was considered in  Zelger v Salinitri  .
(129/83)  [1984] ECR 2397  .
In different Contracting States different criteria existed for when an action became pending and submissions were made, supported by the Advocate-General, that the Court should state at what point any action was to be considered to be pending for the purposes of Articles 21 and 22, for instance, the moment the proceedings were served .
The Court reviewed the comparative material that had been placed before it and continued: "13 .
It follows from the comparison of the legislation mentioned above that a common concept of  lis pendens  cannot be arrived at by a rapprochement of the various relevant national provisions,  A fortiori , therefore, it is not possible to extend to all the contracting parties, as is proposed by the plaintiff in the main action, a concept which is peculiar to German law and which, because of its characteristics, cannot be transposed to the other legal systems concerned .
14 .
It may properly be inferred from Article 21, read as a whole, that a court\'s obligation to decline jurisdiction in favour of another court only comes into existence if it is established that proceedings have been definitively brought before a court in another State involving the same cause of action and between the same parties .
Beyond that, Article 21 gives no indication of the nature of the procedural formalities which must be taken into account for the purposes of considering whether or not to recognise the existence of such an effect .
In particular, it gives no indication as to the answer to the question whether a  lis pendens  comes into being upon the receipt by a court of an application or upon service or notification of that application on or to the party concerned .
15 .
Since the object of the Convention is not to unify those formalities, which are closely linked to the organisation of judicial procedure in the various States, the question as to the moment which the conditions for definitive seisin for the purposes of Article 21 are met must be appraised and resolved, in the case of each court, according to the rules of its own national law .
That method allows each court to establish with a sufficient degree of certainty, by reference to its own national law, as regards itself, and by reference to the national law of any other court which has been seised, as regards that court, the order or priority in time of several actions brought within the conditions laid down by the Convention .
16 .
The answer to the question raised by the Oberlandes-gericht Munchen is therefore that Article 21 of the Convention must be interpreted as meaning that the court "first seised" is the one before which the requirements for proceedings to become definitively pending are first fulfilled, such requirements to be determined in accordance with the national law of each of the courts concerned. .
Thus the Court declined the invitation to lay down any particular time at which any action would become pending .
In the final sentence of paragraph 14, the Court accepted that the Convention does not preclude the possibility that the receipt by a court of an application may be the moment at which a  lis pendens  comes into being .
It left the question to the national law of each of the courts concerned .
But it stated that the test which the Convention requires the national court to apply is: "the court \'first seized\' is the one before which the requirements for proceedings to become definitively pending are first fulfilled" .
It is this test which in our judgment is decisive of the questions which arise in the present case .
It is also to be noted that the  Zelger  judgment expressly recognises that a court considering an .Article 21 or 22 question will have not only to consider the pendency of the action before it under its own national law but also the pendency under the national laws of other States of any relevant actions pending before the courts of the other States, (para.15) Thus it recognises that the courts of one State will have to reach a decision regarding the pendency of an action before the courts of another State notwithstanding that the question involves the national law of that other State .
In  Dresser UK v Falcongate Freight Management  [1991] 2 Lloyds 557, followed in  Neste Chemicals v D.K.Line  tl994] 2 Lloyds 6, the Court of Appeal has held that in English procedural law an action becomes definitively pending upon the service of the writ, not upon its mere issue .
This is authority binding upon us, as it was on Mance J, that the present action was not definitively pending - that the English court was not seized of this action - until the writ had been served .
Prior to the Judgment of the European Court of Justice in  The \'Maciej Rataj\'  (406/92), delivered on 6th December 1994, no judgment had had to address the question of multiple parties .
That case concerned the carriage on the vessel, the "Tatry", of various consignments of soya bean oil which had been discharged at Rotterdam and Hamburg contaminated, it was said, by diesel oil .
Various actions and cross-actions,  in rem  and  in personam , were commenced by or against three different groups of cargo owners by or against the carriers or one or other of their vessels in various courts in The Netherlands and England .
The questions referred to the Court by the English Court of Appeal included the question of the breadth of the phrases "same cause of action" and "related actions"; one question directly raised the question how the phrase "between the same parties" in Article 21 was to be understood and applied .
The Court again linked the use of that phrase in Article 21 with its use in Article 27(3) and emphasised the need to construe the two provisions together .
The Court held: "33 .
In the light of the wording of Article 21 of the Convention and the objective set out above, that article must be understood as requiring, as a condition of the obligation of the second court seised to decline jurisdiction, that the parties to the two actions be identical .
34 .
Consequently, where some of the parties are the same as the parties to an action which has already been started, Article 21 requires the second court seised to decline jurisdiction only to the extent to which the parties to the proceedings pending before it are also parties to the action previously started before the court of another Contracting state; it does not prevent the proceedings from continuing between the other parties .
35 .
Admittedly, that interpretation of Article 21 involves fragmenting the proceedings .
However, Article 22 mitigates that disadvantage .
That article allows the second court seised to stay proceedings or to decline jurisdiction on the ground that the actions are related, if the conditions there set out are satisfied .
36 .
Accordingly, the answer to the first question is that, on a proper construction of Article 21 of the Convention, where two actions involve the same cause of action and some but not all of the parties to the second action are the same as the parties to the action commenced earlier in another Contracting State, the second court seised is required to decline jurisdiction only to the extent to which the parties to the proceedings before it are also parties to the action previously commenced; it does not prevent the proceedings from continuing between the other parties. .
Thus the Court held that a party by party approach must be adopted: to the extent that any of the parties in the relevant actions are the same, then Article 21 applies to those actions insofar as those actions are between those parties and not otherwise .
The Court also recognised that this has the result that litigation may become fragmented .
A court may have to decline jurisdiction as between some parties but allow the action to continue as between others .
An Article 22 question will then almost certainly arise and have to be addressed by the court (or courts) to which that article applies .
The Court in the  Maciej Rataj  was not as such asked, and therefore did not express a view about, how the question which court was first seized was to be answered under Article 21 when there were multiple parties .
This point was keenly debated before us .
The Appellants argued that Article 21, as construed in the  Zelger  and  Maciej Ratal  judgments, requires the question of definitive pendency to be answered party by party .
The subject matter of the article is the  lis  between the relevant pairs of parties; when did that  lis  become definitively pending .
The answer that the question will receive will depend upon which  lis  one is asking about .
The logical force of this submission is compelling and it is clearly supported by the authorities .
The Respondents on the other hand argued for a more pragmatic approach .
They pointed out that part of the purpose of the Convention was the simplification of procedures .
They argued that .Articles 22 and 21 should be construed together and that the court should always ask itself as a threshold question which court was first seized; it is only after that question has been answered that the court second seized need consider under .Article 21 the extent to which the action before it involves the same cause of action and is between the same parties .
Hence, they argue that the relevant date for Article 21 (and Article 22) is the first date upon which it can be said that any defendant has been served .
Both of the rival arguments sought to draw assistance from the  Dresser  judgment: the Appellants argued that the combination of a party by party approach and the test of date of service made their argument irresistible; the Respondents argued that the  Dresser  service date approach would produce an impossibly fragmented approach and therefore cannot be applied .
However the  Dresser  judgment was not concerned with multiple parties; it was merely concerned to carry through into English procedural law the effect of the construction of Article 21 of the Convention upon which the European Court has spoken in  Zelger  .
The Court\'s judgment in  Maciej Rataj  now requires a party by party approach .
Forensically, each advocate sought to extend his argument from one of the articles, 21 or 22, to the other .
The Respondents\' argument had obvious force where the question is which of the two courts was first seized of one of the related actions to which Article 22 applies; they then, with less conviction and little loyalty to  Maciej Ratal  and  Zelger  or the wording of Article 21, sought to apply the same approach to Article 21 .
The Appellants, by contrast, sought to argue that the court first seized for the purpose of certain parties under Article 21 should necessarily be treated as the court first seized also for the purpose of Article 22, disregarding both the different subject matter and wording of Article 22 and the  reductio ad absurdum  to which this argument could give rise .
In country \'X\', A & B sue C, D, E & F; in country \'Y\', C & D sue A, B & G. The \'X\' proceedings are served on D, E & F before any of the \'Y\' proceedings have been issued or served, but C is served later .
Country \'X\', under Article 21, declines (or suspends) jurisdiction in favour of country \'Y\' of the action as between A & B and C; and country \'Y\' will be under an obligation under Article 21 to decline jurisdiction in favour of country \'X\' of the action as between D and A & B .
The Appellants\' extension of their argument suggests that country \'X\', having given effect to Article 21, should then go on and treat itself as second seized for the purposes of Article 22 even though, as regards all the remaining parties and the totality of the litigation now before it, country \'X\' is manifestly the country first seized and country \'Y\' is clearly, on a party by party basis, the second seized (A & B and D) or not seized at all (A & B and E & F) .
The same applies to country \'Y\': having retained the action as between C and A & B but not as between D and A & B, the question for country \'Y\' becomes which country was first seized of litigation involving the common cause of action which gives rise to the risk of irreconcilable judgments - the Article 22 question .
The answer must be country \'X\' .
These arguments therefore provided a strong indication of the correct application of Articles 21 and 22 and to what extent the arguments on each side were soundly based .
Mance J had to reach his decision without the assistance of the European Court\'s judgment in  Maciej Ratal  .
He did not adopt a party by party approach; he found it difficult to reconcile with what he regarded as the rational aims of the Convention .
He held (p.98) that: "The interpretation \'which best matches the context and purpose of the Convention\' is in my judgment one which gives a single date of definitive pendency for each action by taking the date of first service on any defendant in a case of multiple defendants. .
He therefore accepted the argument of the Plaintiffs that the English courts were first seized when the first defendant was served; he gave the same answer under Article 21 as under Article 22 .
Although it is accepted that the reasoning of Mance J cannot, as such, stand with the judgment of the Court in  Maciej Rataj , the arguments of the Respondents before us are substantially to the same effect and would, if accepted, lead to the same conclusion .
The Respondents, relying upon the arguments to which we have referred, submitted that the date upon which the English court became seized of the present action was still, for the purposes of Article 21, 15th April 1993, the date upon which the first batch of Defendants were served .
But it is not necessary for us to rule upon this submission since in our judgment the English court was the first seized whether the 15th April is the correct date or some later date down to the end of June by which time, on either side\'s submissions, all the relevant Defendants save Mr. Nunez had been served with the English writ .
The Application of Article 21, the Quail Action: For the purposes of Article 21, the proceedings which are relevant are, in England, the present action and, in Spain, the \'Quail\' proceedings .
(We will leave on one side for the time being the criminal proceedings; we consider that the Judge was clearly correct in his conclusion that they could not assist the Defendant\'s case on Article 21. .
After the amendment of the Quail action, the parties who are common to the English action and to the amended Quail action are Grupo Torras and messrs de la Rosa, de Mir, Nunez, Folchi and Soler .
It is accepted for present purposes that the causes of action as between these parties are the same in the two actions .
Approaching the matter on a party by party basis, as contended for by the Appellants, and applying  Dresser , the date at which the English courts first became seized as between these parties was 21st June 1993, with the exception of Mr. Nunez who was not served until 15th November 1993 .
On this assumption, the relevant question is whether the Spanish courts became seized as between these parties before 21st June 1993 .
Mance J held that they did because he held that the Spanish courts became seized on 18th June 1993, the date upon which the amended Quail proceedings were admitted .
Before us both sides challenge this conclusion .
The Respondents submit, by their amended Respondents\' Notice, that the Judge should have found that the Spanish courts were not seized until 1st October 1994, the date upon which Grupo Torras was served with the amended Quail proceedings; if this submission is right, the English proceedings would take priority whichever of the rival interpretations of Article 21 was to be preferred, save in the case of Mr. Nunez .
When the draft judgments in this appeal were handed down the exceptional position of Mr. Nunez was not appreciated by the Court, since the argument had proceeded on the basis that all the added Quail Plaintiffs could be treated similarly .
It was then pointed out that this was not so .
The matter was adjourned so that the Plaintiffs could decide whether they wished to continue the action against Mr. Nunez, in which case the Court would have to resolve the dispute as to the interpretation of Article 21 to which we have adverted .
In the result the Plaintiffs discontinued the action against him and accordingly, if the Respondents are right that the Spanish Courts were not seized of the Quail proceedings until 1st October 1993, we do not have to resolve this question .
We should add that at the same time the Plaintiffs\' discontinued against Mr. Pique; he is not a party to the Quail proceedings, but a question in relation to Article 22 might have arisen in his case, but for the discontinuance .
The Appellants submit that the correct finding is that the Spanish Courts were seized before 21st June 1993 .
They put their case in a number of alternative ways; (1) The Spanish courts became seized on 9th June 1992 because once the Quail proceedings had been amended (on 18th May 1993) the amendment related back under Spanish procedural law to the original date of filing and the date of filing is the date upon which a Spanish court becomes under Spanish procedural law seized of an action .
This way of putting their case would, if accepted, also make the Article 21 interpretation dispute academic; 9th June 1992 precedes any possible date for the English proceedings .
(2)   Alternatively, if the date of admission not filing is to be taken, the Spanish courts became seized on 12th May 1993, the date on which the original Quail proceedings were admitted .
(3)   Alternatively, the date of filing the amendment of the Quail proceedings, 18th May 1993, is the date upon which the Spanish court became seized of the amended Quail proceedings .
(4)   Alternatively, if the date of admission not filing is to be taken, the relevant date is then, as the Judge found, 18 th  June 1993 .
Therefore the critical questions become whether the Respondents are right that the date upon which civil proceedings become definitively pending under Spanish procedural law is the date of service and whether the Appellants are right that they can rely upon the principle of relation back recognised by Spanish procedural law .
These questions are in fact inter-related because the Appellants use the relation back argument to support their argument in support of taking the filing date .
As previously stated the Appellants criticised the way the Judge approached the issues of Spanish law as fact and the use he made of the  Dresser  judgment .
They submit that he sought to arrive at his own conclusions about Spanish law without sufficient regard to what the expert witnesses said was its effect .
In particular, they criticised his rejection of the filing date as the critical date under Spanish law and his adoption of the date of admission as being the relevant date .
The Judge\'s finding that admission was the critical date for civil proceedings was contrary to the views of both side\'s experts .
It has been submitted to us that he failed to make a necessary distinction between what was involved in the admission of ordinary civil proceedings (like the Quail action) and the admission of criminal proceedings started by  querella  .
He said (at p.133): "As in the criminal context, the decision by a Spanish civil court whether or not to admit represents the process by which the court determines whether it will seize itself [of] proceedings which up to that point have merely been the subject of a claim formulated by a claimant .
Admission is the key to pursuit of the matter .
It involves the Spanish court taking a positive view as to the regularity of the proceedings both procedurally and substantively .
After admission the court automatically effects service. .
It was accepted before us that the effect of the expert evidence was that in ordinary civil proceedings the step of admission was a purely administrative exercise, checking the documents filed by the plaintiff to see that they comply with the formal requirements and are complete .
Unlike the position in the procedural law governing Spanish criminal proceedings, admission does not involve any decision by the court or any determination that the court seize itself of the proceedings .
Put at its highest, it is merely the stage at which the papers are accepted as fit for service .
Therefore we accept the primary submission of both parties that, on the evidence, the date of admission cannot be taken as the date on which the Spanish court became seized of the Quail or amended Quail action .
If admission is not to be adopted as the stage at which the Spanish civil court is to be treated as seized of the action for the purposes of the Convention, the choice lies between the date of filing and the date of service .
In our judgment, the choice does not depend upon determining any contentious question of Spanish law: the difference between the parties depends upon how the question ought to be approached as a matter of the implementation of the Convention .
The evidence is that Spanish law has, like many other continental jurisdictions, a well established doctrine of  lis pendens  which can give rise to a procedural defence,  litispendencia  .
Its statutory basis is to be found in article 533(5) of the Spanish Code of Civil Procedure which allows a defendant to raise as an "exception" "the  lis pendens  in the same or another court with jurisdiction" .
The exception  litispendencia  has the character of a procedural defence .
Its validity is determined upon a basis of priority .
The prior action has the status of being pending; it is treated as being the \'master\' and the second action must defer to it .
The exception of  litispendencia  having been raised in the second action and upheld, the judge has -various procedural powers to ensure that the relevant matters are all determined in the first action .
It was the view of the Spanish witnesses, at least on the Defendants\' side, that Article 21 of the Convention was an implementation of the same principle of procedural law .
The Defendants\' expert accordingly reasoned that the application of Article 21 simply involved the application of the domestic Spanish law and asking what date would the Spanish court take for the purpose of assessing the priority to be given to the Quail action if an exception of  litispendencia  was raised in it by Grupo Torras .
They said that the Spanish court would take the date of the issue of the proceedings .
They have the clearest support for this view of the domestic Spanish law .
In October 1992 the Supreme Court of Spain (civil appeal No.7557) had to decide which of two actions should be treated as the prior .
One action had been filed first but the proceedings were not served until after the proceedings in the other had been both filed and served .
The Supreme Court held that priority should be given to the action which had been filed first; the exception of  litispendencia  could not be raised in that action .
However it is also clear, and it is accepted by the Appellants before us, that the exception cannot be taken until the proceedings in the action alleged to be the pending action (the  lis pendens ) have not only been filed but also admitted and served .
The Judge found: "They [the witnesses] were on common ground that an exceptio  could not be relied on without service of the allegedly earlier proceedings .
Dr Carreras\' view was that once there had been such service, the order of filing would govern. .
(p.130) Dr Carreras was the Defendants\' expert .
"Thus under Spanish law the priority of two sets of civil proceedings will be determined by their dates of filing, assuming both to have been not only admitted but also served when the  exceptio litispandencia  is raised. .
(p. 133) The Appellants accepted, and relied upon, these findings .
It is now necessary, using these findings, to apply the test laid down in Zelger .
"Article 21 of the Convention must be interpreted as meaning that the court "first seized" is the one before which the requirements for proceedings to become definitively pending are first fulfilled, such requirements to be determined in accordance with the national law of each of the courts concerned. .
{para.16) On the findings which the Appellants accept, it is clear that the requirements of Spanish law for an action to become definitively pending are that it has been filed, accepted and served .
Until all those requirements have been met, it cannot be relied upon as a -  lis pendens ; it merely has a provisional character .
The Appellants\' case confuses the test for pendency with the procedural rule which applies in Spanish law once pendency has been established .
But it is the Convention, as interpreted in  Zelger  which lays down what the consequences of pendency are to be;  Zelger  confines the role of the domestic law to answering the question when were the requirements of that law for the action to have become definitively pending first fulfilled .
It follows that for the purposes of Articles 21 and 22 of the Convention the Spanish courts did not become seized of the Quail proceedings as between the relevant parties until 1st October 1993, that is to say, a date after the date upon which the English court had, on any view, became seized of the present action as between the relevant parties, which no longer includes Mr. Nunez and Mr. Pique because of the discontinuance of the action against them .
The Appellants had a related argument which, they said, led to the conclusion that the date of filing {whether of the original Quail proceedings or of the amendment) should be taken as the date of definitive pendency .
They said that the evidence justified the conclusion that an amendment, once allowed, was treated as relating back to the time of the filing of the proceedings so that any claim or party was to be treated as if included from the start .
Similarly, they said that once the question of  litispendencia  had been properly raised, Spanish law treated the action as having been pending since the time of filing .
There was evidence to support both these submissions as a matter of Spanish law .
But they still did not advance the Appellants\' case under the Convention .
The test laid down in  Zelger  is a chronological test .
It requires a moment in time to be identified .
When were the requirements first fulfilled .
A doctrine of relation back cannot alter the answer to be given to this question .
Under Spanish law, the requirement for pendency was not fulfilled until the proceedings were served on Grupo Torras in October 1993 .
Again, the argument of the Appellants confuses the fulfilment of the requirement with the consequences of that fulfilment in the domestic procedural law .
Accordingly the ground of appeal which was founded on the submission that as between Grupo Torras and the Quail Plaintiffs, other than Mr. Nunez, that is to say, de la Rosa, de Mir, Folchi and Soler, the Spanish court was the first seized, fails .
The English court was the court first seized under Article 21 .
The Criminal ( Querella)  Proceedings; The problems for the Defendants in their reliance upon the Spanish  Querella  proceedings were substantial .
Although such proceedings included within them proceedings which could give rise to a civil judgment, the civil aspect was ancillary to and dependant upon the criminal proceedings .
The proceedings are started by the filing of a  guerella  but that is followed by a substantive decision whether the proceedings are to be admitted .
The Judge\'s finding about the significance of admission was accurate in relation to the criminal procedure .
If not admitted the proceedings can proceed no further .
If the proceedings are admitted, the matter is then referred to an investigating judge who will carry out his own investigations .
These are not limited to the matters or persons referred to in the  querella  .
If at the conclusion of his investigations, he considers that any criminal charges should be brought against any person, he passes the file to another judge who prepares the provisional qualification,  qalificacion provisional \' .
It is at this stage that the charges will be formulated .
It is after this that oral evidence is taken, a final qualification is settled and the matter proceeds to trial .
Who will be tried and for what will depend upon the formulation of the charges and the terms of the qualification .
It is at the conclusion of the resultant trial that a finding of civil liability can be made .
It will be appreciated that this procedure means that it will be difficult to satisfy the  Zelger  test at any of the earlier stages .
It may be impossible to say definitively who are going to be the parties and what are going to be the causes of action .
.All these difficulties applied in the present case .
But the Appellants had a further difficulty .
As at the end of June 1993, by which time all the relevant Defendants had been served with the -writ in the English action and the English action was on any view definitively pending, the status of the Spanish criminal proceedings was that Judge Moreiras had ruled that they should not be admitted .
It was not until February 1994 that they were finally admitted by an appellate court .
(Currently the investigating judge is still carrying out his investigations. .
Unless the Appellants can rely upon some principle of relation back, they on any view cannot succeed on this ground of appeal .
But as is clearly stated in  Zelger , the criterion to be applied is a chronological one .
When were the requirements for the criminal proceedings to become definitively pending first fulfilled .
The date when these requirements were satisfied could not on the evidence be earlier than February 1994 .
Accordingly this ground of appeal fails as well .
ARTICLE 22, ORDER 11 and  FORUM NOM-CONVENIENS : The grounds of appeal relating to Article 22, forum conveniens and Order 11 leave all postulated that the appeal under Article 21 would succeed and that there would be at least some proceedings which under Article 21 would have to take place in Spain .
The appeal under Article 21 having failed on the ground that the English court was the court first seized, the dependant appeals must fail as well .
It is therefore unnecessary for us to enter upon any consideration of what would have been the potential impact of Article 22 upon related proceedings in this country and Spain .
CONCLUSION: It follows that these appeals must be dismissed.  .
b'LORD JUSTICE STAUGHTON: \tThis is the judgment of the Court .
\tIn  Macmillan Inc v Bishopsgate Investment Trust plc  (no.3)  (1996) 1 WLR 387  this court had to consider what system of law should determine who had the better title to some shares in Berlitz International Inc., a New York Corporation .
The facts in that case, either proved or assumed, were as follows:  Macmillan (the 11th defendants in one of the present actions) were a wholly owned subsidiary of Maxwell Communications Corporation plc, a company owned partly by the public and partly by Mr Robert Maxwell and his family; they had a majority holding in the shares of Berlitz; those shares were transferred out of Macmillan\'s name to Bishopsgate Investment Trust, who were owned and controlled by Mr Maxwell and his family; and then the shares were pledged to secure the debts of companies in the private ownership of Mr Maxwell and his family .
Thus Macmillan suffered a loss and those latter companies received a gain, unless and until Macmillan succeed in recovering the shares or (since they have now been sold by agreement) their value .
\tWe have referred to that case merely as a possible illustration of the problem that we face in the present appeals .
We are being asked to answer preliminary issues, which Waller J. ordered to be tried in two actions in the Commercial Court .
That was no doubt a very sensible procedure .
But it is sometimes helpful to us to have some live facts to bear in mind, rather than the dry bones of a preliminary issue .
\tThe present dispute arises out of a number of contracts of insurance concluded for years beginning on 1st August 1988, and 1st July 1989, 1990 and 1991 .
As commonly happens the contracts were arranged in layers: first there was a contract with a limit of \xc2\xa31 million, subscribed by New Hampshire Insurance Company alone; above that there were a succession of layers up to the following totals - 1988/1989 \xc2\xa325 million 1989/1990 \xc2\xa335 million 1990/1991 \xc2\xa350 million 1991/1992 \xc2\xa350 million New Hampshire were the leading underwriters on all contracts, except for the top \xc2\xa310 million layers in 1990/1991 and 1991/1992, which were subscribed only by Chubb Insurance Company of Europe SA .
Other insurance companies and syndicates at Lloyds, who are the second to twenty-sixth plaintiffs in action 1993 folio 440, subscribed the contracts except for those written by New Hampshire or Chubb alone .
It is not possible to refer to the parties as the plaintiffs and the defendants, as there are two actions and for the most part the same parties feature on opposite sides .
So we will refer to all the insurers collectively as the Insurers, and as the Other Insurers when we are excluding Chubb .
The beneficiaries of the insurance contracts were on one view companies in the Maxwell group, together with some pension fund trustees, and on another the Maxwell group itself .
It is the companies, or rather some of them, and the trustees who feature as parties in these actions .
They have been called the Claimants .
As has already been mentioned, in some of the Maxwell companies Mr Robert Maxwell and his family held a controlling interest but there was also ownership by the public; others were owned by Mr Maxwell and his family alone .
\tThe insurance cover at the first layer was on the form of New Hampshire, headed "Comprehensive Dishonesty, Disappearance and Destruction Policy Form A. .
All subsequent layers were on the same form, save that there is a dispute when it comes to the Chubb contracts .
In broad terms it is an insurance against crime .
The first part of the cover, and that with which the present dispute is concerned, is defined as follows: \t\t\tINSURING AGREEMENTS \t\t\tEMPLOYEE DISHONESTY COVERAGE - FORM A \t1 .
Loss of Money, Securities and other property which the Insured shall sustain, to an amount not exceeding in the aggregate the amount stated in the Table of Limits of Liability applicable to this Insuring Agreement I, resulting directly from one or more fraudulent or dishonest acts committed by an Employee, acting alone or in collusion with others .
\tDishonest or fraudulent acts as used in this Insuring Agreement shall mean only dishonest or fraudulent acts committed by such Employee with the manifest intent: \t(a)\tto cause the insured to sustain such loss; and  \t(b)\tto obtain financial benefit for the Employee, or for any other person or organisation intended by the Employee to receive such benefit, other than salaries, commissions, fees, bonuses, promotions, awards, profit sharing, pensions or other employee benefits earned in the normal course of employment .
\tThe preliminary issues ordered by Waller J. on 6th October 1994 comprised twelve questions or groups of questions .
Only seven of them are still in dispute on this appeal, but we are still left with a task which is formidable enough .
Fortunately we have a clear and comprehensive judgment of Potter J., from whom this appeal comes .
\tBefore the judge there was a good deal of evidence, both oral and in witness statements, by witnesses of fact and an expert .
There was also some contest as to what was relevant and admissible on the topic of interpretation of the contracts, followed by an interlocutory appeal to this court comprising Staughton, Millett and Ward LJJ .
In extempore judgments delivered on 15th June 1995 it is said that there was some slight divergence of view between them, and that Staughton LJ represented the middle ground .
At all events the parties have been content to rely on that judgment .
We would reiterate the four principles which it proposed relating to the material that is relevant to the interpretation of a written contract: \t(1)\tNothing is relevant unless it was known to, or reasonably capable of being known to, both parties at the time when the contract was made .
In particular, an undisclosed intention held  in pectore  by one of the parties is not admissible for the purpose of interpretation .
\t(2)\tThe court looks first at the written document alone, and determines what it means from the ordinary meaning of the language used, unless some customary meaning is pleaded and proved .
\t(3)\tHowever, the court may also have regard to the surrounding circumstances, now commonly referred to as the matrix, the genesis or aim, the market in which the parties are operating .
But this evidence must qualify under principle (1) if it is to be admitted .
\t(4)\tEvidence of negotiations is not admissible .
This is subject to some exceptions, such as a case of rectification, or if it is said that agreement was reached in negotiations as to the meaning of a particular term, or that the contract was made by a continuous process of agreeing some terms and then turning to consider others .
The boundary of what may be considered surrounding circumstances, within principle (3), is unfortunately not easy to draw .
All too often a great deal of evidence is produced under that head which is of little or no help to interpretation .
The present case is no exception in that respect .
\tWith that introduction we proceed to the individual questions that we are required to answer .
(Questions A,B,C,E and J are no longer in issue. .
Issue  (D): \t\tWhether the Chubb Policies were contained in and/or evidenced by  \t\t(a) the slip signed for Chubb on 8th July 1990; and/or \t\t(b) the policy wording numbered 81296514 and the documents referred to therein; and/or \t\t(c) the slip signed for Chubb on 3rd July 1991; and /or \t\t(d) the policy wording numbered 81296514A and the documents referred to therein .
\tThis issue relates to what have been called Year 3 and Year 4 of the insurance .
The question is whether Chubb\'s form of policy became, in each case, part of the contract for the top \xc2\xa310 million layer which Chubb insured .
\tThe process started with a quotation dated 2nd July 1990 .
Against the printed word " Form " it said \t\tChubb Follow Form .
The brokers, Willis Wrightson Ltd, would apparently have known that this was a reference to a form of policy used by Chubb .
Next there was the slip, initialled by Chubb on 8th July 1990 .
Against the word FORM this said  \t\tComprehensive Dishonesty, Disappearance  \t\tand Destruction Policy Form A .
Those were the very words on the front of the New Hampshire form of policy, which was used for all other layers of this insurance and for all the Other Insurers .
There was no reference on the Chubb slip to the Chubb Follow Form, and in addition to the description of the Form there were the words "CONDITIONS as per underlying. .
\tThirdly there was the Chubb policy no .
812965414 .
This was on a Chubb form headed Excess Fidelity Policy .
It is, presumably, the Chubb Follow Form, and is significantly different from the New Hampshire form .
It was signed on behalf of Chubb on 21st January 1991 .
It evidently reached the brokers, since they sent it on to Mr Ward of Maxwell Communication Corporation plc on 13th February 1991 .
Mr Ward was employed in the Risk Management Department, which assumed the task of arranging insurance for the Maxwell Group - or for all the companies in it .
On the letter from the brokers which enclosed the Chubb policy he wrote \t\tChecked & okay with a date and his initials .
He said in his statement,  \t\tTo the best of my knowledge I then put the original policy into a cabinet which contained all of the original policies placed on behalf of the Risk Management Division .
The idea was that all original policies, regardless of their nature, would be found in one place .
\tThe events relating to the Chubb policy for Year 4 were in some respects different .
Chubb\'s quotation, dated 28th June 1991, merely said \t\tTerms and Conditions as expiring and mentioned no form .
The slip, initialled by Chubb on 3rd July, said \t\tFORM     WW Excess Layer wording .
There is no direct evidence of any such form .
During the argument there were suggestions that WW might stand for Willis Wrightson, or for world wide .
That must remain speculation .
The slip also had the line "CONDITIONS  As per Primary Policy attached. .
That was the New Hampshire form of policy .
\tThereafter policy no 81296514A was prepared on the Chubb form and sent to the brokers on 8th August 1991 .
In relation to that year Mr Ward of the Risk Management Department said this in his statement: \t\tTo the best of my knowledge I did not receive a copy of the Chubb excess layer wording for the subsequent policy year, namely, July 1991/June 1992 .
I am advised by Messrs Norton Rose, that they have reviewed all of the documents in the cabinet of original insurance policies and they have been unable to find any original or copy of the Chubb policy wording for the 1991/92 policy year, although the original for the previous year, together with the original letter dated the 13th February 1991 from Willis Corroon is contained in the cabinet .
\t\tIt is conceivable, bearing in mind the time period between renewal and the collapse of the Maxwell Group, that the 1991/92 wording would not have been received by the department prior to my leaving at the end of 1992 .
Possibly it was stuck in the system at Willis Corroon .
That was the new name of Willis Wrightson .
\tIn neither year was there any complaint or protest about the terms of the Chubb policy, either by the brokers or the Risk Management Department of the Maxwell Group, so far as we are aware .
\tThe pleading of Chubb as to how the two policies came to form part of the contracts is distinctly vague, and there was no request for Further and Better Particulars .
But Mr Phillips on their behalf put his case in three ways .
First he submitted that, when each of the slips was initialled by Chubb, it was implied in the terms thereby agreed that the Chubb Follow Form was part of the contract .
\tThe basis for this implication was said to be as follows: \t(i)\tChubb always used this form when they were alone on an excess layer .
(ii)\tThat was known to brokers such as Willis Wrightson .
(iii)\tWillis Wrightson must be taken to have accepted that when they placed the business with Chubb .
(iv)\tSubsequent conduct of the parties was consistent only with that .
There was evidence in support of points (i) and (ii) which was not in terms contradicted .
However, we were shown a letter dated 16th January 1991, to New Hampshire from Miss Godwin of the policy division at Willis Wrightson .
It said in a postscript "please could you send me one of your wdgs as I need to issue a Pol for \'Chub\'" .
Miss Godwin did not give evidence .
\tThe subsequent conduct referred to in (iv) was confined to the facts which we have already set out .
\tWe cannot accept that argument, if only for the reason that the implication would contradict the express terms of the contract .
Each of the slips referred to a form; in our experience that is extremely common if not universal practice .
In neither case was it the Chubb form .
In those circumstances it cannot in our judgment be implied that the Chubb form was required by the contract that was concluded when the slips were initialled .
\tSecondly it was submitted that, once a policy has been issued, its terms are conclusive evidence of the contract between the parties unless and until it is altered by the process of rectification .
That can happen by agreement of the parties or by order of a court but not otherwise .
And there has been no application for rectification in this case .
\tThis doctrine is said to be supported by  Youell v. Bland Welch & Co Ltd (no.1)  (1990) 2 Ll R. 423 and  Punjab National Bank v. De Boinville  (1992) 1 Ll R.7 .
But in our opinion those cases are concerned with the situation where a policy has been agreed to by the parties .
In those circumstances the policy will, at any rate in the ordinary way, be conclusive evidence of the contract  unless and until it is rectified; the slip cannot be used to add to, explain or contradict the meaning of the policy .
That is not this case .
Here the issue is whether the policy ever was agreed to .
The insurers cannot preempt the answer to that question by the unilateral act of issuing it .
That was the reasoning of Potter J., and we agree with it .
He also had something to say about the operations of Lloyd\'s Policy Signing Office, but with that we are not concerned in this case .
\tThe third submission of Mr Phillips is the most promising .
It is that there was a variation, agreed to on the part of the insured by silence .
Although in the case of Year 3 it may only have occurred after the contract had been in force for five months, presumably it was retrospective .
\tThat there can be acceptance so as to conclude a contract by silence in some circumstances is shown by the case of  Rust v. Abbey Life Assurance Co Ltd  (1979) 2 Ll R.334 .
There Brandon LJ said (at p.339): \t\tIt is clear that in ordinary insurance cases a policy may become a binding contract between an insured and insurers even though the insured has not seen or expressly assented to all the detailed terms of the policy, provided always that such terms are the usual terms of the insurers .
\tHe concluded (at p.340): \t\tIt follows from what I have said that I would uphold the decision of the learned Deputy Judge on the first of the two bases relied on by him .
If I am wrong about that, however, it seems to me that the learned Deputy Judge\'s decision should in the alternative be upheld on the second basis relied on by him .
The plaintiff had the policy in her possession at the end of October, 1993 .
She raised no objection to it of any kind until some seven months later .
While it may well be that in many cases silence or inactivity is not evidence of acceptance, having regard to the facts of this case and the history of the transaction between the parties as previously set out, it seems to me to be an inevitable inference from the conduct of the plaintiff in doing and saying nothing for seven months that she accepted the policy as a valid contract between herself and the first defendants .
\tThat decision was approved by Lord Steyn in  Vitol SA v. Norelf Ltd  (1996) 3 WLR 105 at p.114 .
The dispute there was as to whether inactivity and silence could amount to acceptance of a repudiation .
The answer of Phillips J. at first instance had been, it depends upon the circumstances (p.110) .
Lord Steyn agreed, saying (at p.113) - \t\tOne cannot generalise on the point .
It all depends on the particular contractual relationship and the particular circumstances of the case .
\tWe are thus liberated from the rigid nineteenth century doctrine that there can be an acceptance by conduct but not by silence alone ( Brodgen v. Metropolitan Railway Co  .
(1877) 2 App Cas 666) .
But we feel that we should proceed with some caution before giving too large a licence to one party to a proposed contract to thrust terms on the other without his explicit approval .
\tThe field of insurance may well be one where it is normal practice to make a preliminary contract, and then for one party (the insurers) to send detailed terms to the other, not expecting a reply unless the other regards them as unsatisfactory .
This may be what happens in ordinary life with motor insurance or householder\'s comprehensive insurance .
Often the necessary acceptance can be inferred when the insured, having received the proposed policy, pays the premium .
We enquired whether that was a possible answer in the present case, but it seems that no such argument was put forward before the judge and the facts found in relation to the premium are insufficient .
\tWe have not been told that there was any evidence of a custom in the insurance industry that policy details are accepted unless they are expressly questioned .
Nor does there appear to have been any contention to that effect; it was merely said to be the usual practice as between Chubb and brokers .
The judge did not regard the evidence of that as reliable .
So we must consider the particular relationship and the particular circumstances of this case .
We cannot attribute much, or indeed any, weight to the fact that Mr Ward wrote "checked & okay" on the letter, and put the policy in the place where original policies were kept; those were not circumstances which by inference conveyed acceptance to Chubb, since they did not know of them .
Furthermore Mr Ward was a subordinate member of the Risk Management Department, under Mr Cox who was the head of it and whose task it was to review the primary policy wordings .
\tNevertheless we regard this as a borderline case .
What determines the point, in our judgment, in favour of the Claimants is that the Chubb policy did not merely supplement what was in the slips; it contradicted them, since in each case the slip referred to a different form .
In those circumstances we would require more than the evidence of silence that there is here to persuade us that acceptance by the insured should be inferred .
Like the judge, we would answer issue (D) by saying that the Chubb forms of policy were not part of the terms of the contracts for the top layers in 1993 and 1994 .
Mr Phillips in the course of his reply pointed out that it was and remains the pleaded case of the Claimants that the Chubb policy did form part of the contracts .
How then were they allowed to procure a preliminary issue from Waller J., and to argue before Potter J. that the Chubb policy did  not  form part of the contracts .
Apparently the parties agreed that there was no need for any amendments, at any rate for the time being .
We do not feel that we should tolerate such a cavalier attitude .
The Claimants should be required to amend their pleadings so as to delete assertions which they now themselves contradict .
Issue  (F): \tWhether, on a true construction of the Contracts of Insurance and/or the Chubb Policies, the cover provided was: \t(i)\tsingle in nature (i.e .
that there was a single Assured, "the Maxwell\'s Group of Companies"); or  \t(ii)\tjoint in nature (i.e .
that there was more than one Assured but all Assureds were insured jointly); or      (iii)\tcomposite in nature (i.e .
that there was more than one Assured and each Assured was insured separately) .
\tThe New Hampshire policies for Year 1 and Year 2 contained this wording \t\tName of Insured: \t\tPergamon Holdings Limited &/or Pergamon Group plc &/or Pergamon Media Trust plc &/or Hollis plc &/Or Maxwell Communications Corporation plc &/Or Mirror Holdings Ltd &/Or Subsidiary Companies &/Or Associated Companies &/Or Companies for whom they have (herein called the Insured) instructions to insure .
The reason that the words "(herein called the insured)" appear to be out of place is that they are part of the pre-programmed wording into which details are subsequently inserted .
(The days have unfortunately gone when one could tell at a glance how much of a document was printed for general use and how much typewritten for a specific purpose. .
\tThat wording was proffered by the Claimants, or their brokers, and appeared in the slips for Year 1 and Year 2 .
It appears to us to leave no room whatsoever for doubt as to who were insured: the companies listed or identified (in so far as they are) in the wording .
There may remain a question as to whether they were insured jointly or severally or both; to that we will return .
\tMr Rokison for the Other Insurers argues that the insured was the Maxwell group .
That was not, of course, a legal entity .
Nor were its limits readily identifiable, except to the cognoscenti at headquarters .
There were a number of planks in Mr Rokison\'s platform .
\t(1)\tThe information presented to the Insurers, via the brokers, comprised details of the turnover, locations, number of employees etc .
of companies in the group, and also figures for the group wage roll, turnover and assets .
It was presented in a package for the group as a whole .
This was likely to lead to a smaller premium than one total for many insurances separately placed .
\t(2)\tThe practice in the insurance market, when rating insurance for a group of companies against dishonesty of employees, was to have regard to the predominant activity of the group, instead of rating separately the individual companies by reference to their own businesses .
\t(3)\tThe Risk Management Department knew that .
Indeed they were told it, when they wished to increase the limit for one company which on its own would be rated more highly .
They were told that it would be not much more expensive to increase the limit for all the companies - or all the group - because the rating based on predominant activity was lower .
\tWe suppose that point (1) can perhaps be described as a surrounding circumstance .
At all events, we ruled that evidence of it was admissible when the dispute was last before this court, although that may have been a rather generous view .
We have a good deal more doubt about the admissibility of points (2) and (3) .
But that only mattered when we were considering whether to save the parties from unnecessary expense and the judge from unnecessary labour by excluding evidence from the start .
All that is now of importance is to say, as we do, that nothing in points (1), (2) and (3) is of any assistance in helping us to decide whether the insured were the companies identified or described in the wording, or else "the Maxwell Group. .
\tNext, as point (4), Mr Rokison relies on the use of the words "and/or" in the description of the Insured .
Did it mean that Pergamon Holdings Ltd  or  Pergamon Group plc were the insured .
If so, which .
The expression "and/or " is very commonly used in describing who is insured under a policy - almost invariably, perhaps .
But we doubt if it is used with lawyer-like precision .
We would interpret it as saying, "when the word "insured" is used in this document it may mean all of these companies, or else (depending on the context) it may mean any one of them. .
That is a perfectly sensible interpretation, although Mr Rokison says that it is too clever by half .
For example, at the commencement of the policy it is said that \t\tthe Company ... agrees with the Insured .
That must mean Pergamon Holdings  and  Pergamon Group plc etc .
On the other hand there is cover against loss through forgery of any cheque or bill of exchange \t\tmade or drawn or drawn upon the Insured .
That must mean  one  of the companies .
\t(5)  Mr Rokison points to instances where the policy wording refers to "the insured", "the insured first named", "any insured", "any or all of the insured", "any one of the insured", "the insureds", "every insured", and "every other insured" .
These references show that the draftsman contemplated that there would or might be more than one insured .
Indeed the policy expressly says so: there is a clause which begins \tIf more than one insured is covered by this policy ... We do not see that this diversity of expressions is of any assistance to Mr Rokison in showing that the insured meant the Maxwell Group .
The policy is not by any means written with the precision of an equity draftsman .
Indeed we strongly suspect that it was not written by one person at all or at one time .
It seems more likely that a number of hands have added or amended passages in it from time to time .
\t(6)\tWhen it came to Year 3 and Year 4, there was an indorsement as follows: \tIt is hereby understood and agreed that: \t(1)\tthe title of the Insured as stated in Item 1 of the Declarations is changed to read as follows: \t\tThe Maxwell\'s Group of Companies including \t\tbut not limited to:-   \t\t\tMaxwell Communications Corporation plc \t\t\tHeadington Investments Ltd \t\t\tMirror Group plc \t\t\tPergamon Holdings U.S. Inc \t\tand any Company which is associated with, or a subsidiary of any one of them or is owned and/or controlled by them jointly, or for whom instructions have been received to insure .
That seems to us the high point of Mr Rokison\'s argument, although it also detracts from his submissions relating to Year 1 and Year 2 .
As usual there is the problem with alterations, did the parties mean to clarify what they had said previously or to change it .
\tAt this point we feel that one should sit back and examine what we mean by "the insured" in an insurance contract .
The expression in our view covers two aspects of the person described .
First, he is the person with whom the insurer contracts, the party who is bound as such .
Secondly he is the person who is interested in the property or other event covered by the insurance, and whose loss is to be made good if it occurs .
For the first capacity the insured must, as it seems to us, be a natural or legal person .
Mr Phillips referred us to the case of  Prudential Staff Union v. Hall  (1947) KB 685 as authority for the proposition that a trade union can be a party to a contract of insurance .
However that may be, we do not see that something called a group can be a party to a contract, otherwise than as a contract with all of its members .
See  Chitty on Contracts  (27th edn) para .
9-063: \tLiability of unincorporated associations .
An unincorporated association is not a legal person and therefore cannot sue or be sued unless such a course is authorised by express or implied statutory provisions as in the case of a trade union and a trustee savings bank .
Nor can a contract be made so as to bind all persons who from time to time become members of such an association .
But a contract purportedly made by or with an incorporated association is not necessarily a nullity .
If the person or persons who actually made the contract had no authority to contract on behalf of the members they may be held to have contracted personally .
On the other hand, if they had the authority, express or implied, of all or some of the members of the association to contract on their behalf, the contract can be enforced by or against those members as co-principals to the contract by the ordinary rules of agency .
(We suspect that in the third sentence "incorporated" should be "unincorporated". .
\tWhat then of the second role of the Insured, as the owner of property or some other interest who will suffer loss if it is affected by an insured peril .
On many occasions it may not make much difference whether the insured is the group, or the parent company, or the subsidiaries; all will ultimately have the same interest in the safety of the group\'s property .
But on other occasions the interests will not be the same and ought to be insured separately .
Some of the companies in the Maxwell group were publicly owned, although Mr. Maxwell had a controlling interest .
It would, as it seems to us, have been a breach of duty by the directors of those companies if they had knowingly allowed the companies\' property to be insured on terms which did not afford cover in the event of misconduct by companies in Mr. Maxwell\'s private ownership .
The genesis or aim of the insurance contract was, we think, accurately stated by the judge: \tThe common aim was no more or less than the provision of fidelity insurance cover for all those companies comprising the group named in the definition clause, within the confines of a single policy ... \tIn  P. Samuel & Co. Ltd. v. Dumas  (1924) A.C. 431 a ship was insured for the benefit of both the shipowner and the mortgagees .
She was cast away by the master and crew with the connivance of the owner, but without any complicity of the mortgagees .
Viscount Cave said (at p.445): \tIt may well be that, when two persons are jointly insured and their interests are inseparably connected so that a loss or gain necessarily affects them both, the misconduct of one is sufficient to contaminate the whole insurance: Phillips on Marine Insurance, vol.i., at 235 .
But in this case there is no difficulty in separating the interest of the mortgagee from that of the owner .
Lord Sumner (at p.469) put the other side of the coin, that where there are separate interests one insured is not affected by misconduct of another: \tFraud is not something absolute, existing in vacuo; it is a fraud upon someone .
A man who tries to cheat his underwriters fails if they find him out, but how does his wrong against them invest them with new rights against innocent strangers to it .
\tIn  Commonwealth Construction Co. Ltd. v. Imperial Oil Ltd.  (1976) 69 DLR (3d) 558 at p.560 De Grandpre J., delivering the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada, referred without disapproval to (but distinguished) a principle of property insurance adopted by the Court of Appeal: \tA policy issued to many persons will amount to several insurance if the persons insured have different interests in the subject matter of the insurance .
\tSo too in  General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Corporation v. Midland Bank Ltd.  (1940) 2 KB 388 Sir Wilfred Greene MR said (at p. 404): \tThat there can be a joint insurance by persons having a joint interest is, of course, manifest .
If A and B are joint owners of property - and I use that phrase in the strict sense - an undertaking to indemnify them jointly is a true contract of indemnity in respect of a joint loss which they have jointly suffered .
Again, there can be no objection to combining in one insurance a number of persons having different interests in the subject-matter of the insurance, but I find myself unable to see how an insurance of that character can be called a joint insurance .
In such a case the interest of each of the insured is different .
The amount of his loss, if the subject-matter of the insurance is destroyed or damaged, depends on the nature of his interest, and the covenant of indemnity which the policy gives must, in such a case, necessarily operate as a covenant to indemnify in respect of each individual different loss which the various persons named may suffer .
In such a case there is no joint element at all .
\tThat, as it seems to us, is this case .
The companies that formed the Maxwell group had separate interests to insure, and not a joint interest in the same property .
That must have been known to the Insurers, in the light of the companies\' disparate businesses and seeing that one of them was Mirror Group Newspapers .
It is not clear why they adopted a different definition of the insured for Year 3 and Year 4 .
But that definition was still capable of referring to the companies rather than the group as parties to the insurance contract (as they must have been), and also as the owners of separate interests which were to be covered by insurance separately .
That in our judgment was the intention of the parties, and the effect of the policies .
It is true that there is in the policies a clause headed Joint Insured .
But the content of the clause does not go as far as to say that all those insured have joint interests or are joint contractors .
Rather it deals with some specific points which arise under another issue .
\tIn the light of our answer to issue (D), no separate point arises under this head on the Chubb policies .
Those, instead of naming the Insured as such, had the wording - \tParent Organisation:  The Maxwell Group of Companies .
That would have needed consideration if those policies had been incorporated in the contracts; but they were not .
The slips for Chubb in Year 3 and Year 4 had the same description of the insured, with very slight and immaterial variations, as the New Hampshire policies for those years .
\tWe agree with the judge that all the contracts of insurance were composite in nature, there being more than one insured and each being insured separately .
Issue G: \tWhether, in the light of the answer to issue (F) above and on a true construction of the Contracts of Insurance and Chubb Policies, any non-disclosure or misrepresentation, breach of the duty of utmost good faith or breach of any other obligation by any one Assured in itself:- \t(i)\tconstitutes a non-disclosure, misrepresentation, breach of the duty of the utmost good faith or breach of such obligation by all or any other Assured:  and/or \t(ii)\tin the event and to the extent that it entitles Insurers to avoid the Contracts of Insurance and/or Chubb to avoid the Chubb Policies as against that Assured, also entitles Insurers to avoid the Contracts of Insurance and/or Chubb to avoid the Chubb Policies as against all or any other Assureds .
\tIn the light of our conclusion on issue (F), the answer to this question is in our judgment, No .
Technically one ought to enquire whether for each layer in each year there was one contract, or as many contracts as there were companies insured .
And if the former, can a contract be avoided for non-disclosure as against one or some of the insured, but not against others .
We feel that we are relieved from the need to answer those questions by the authority of the House of Lords, in the passage already quoted from  P. Samuel & Co Ltd v Dumas  .
That, it is true, was not a case of non-disclosure but of wilful misconduct by one of two persons insured .
But in our opinion the principle that the innocent party can still recover if it is a separate insurance must equally apply .
\tPotter J had a proviso or caveat in answering this question .
He felt that there were likely to be situations "whereby an officer of Company A, as well as exercising functions in Company B, would also have had knowledge of the affairs of Company C and/or the actions or intentions of its officers, of such a kind that he would have been under parallel duties of disclosure and/or obligations of good faith in respect of all three" .
We were not addressed on that point, and the judge\'s observations on it should stand .
Issue H: \tWhether, in the light of the answer to issue (F) above and on a true construction of the Contracts of Insurance and the Chubb Policies, a loss:- \t(i)\tresulting from a transfer of assets from one Assured to another Assured; is capable of constituting a loss falling within the terms of the Contracts of Insurance and/or the Chubb Policies .
[Part (ii) of the question was withdrawn] .
\tIf by a peril insured against one of the companies insured is deprived of money, securities or other property, which is received by another of the companies insured, that is in our judgment a loss covered by the policy .
The answer flows from the view that we have reached on issue (F) .
Issue I: \tWhether, in the light of the answer to issue (F) above and on a true construction of the Contracts of Insurance and the Chubb Policies, acts giving rise to and/or intended to give rise to:- \t(i)\ta transfer of assets from one Assured to another Assured: are capable of constituting dishonest or fraudulent acts for the purposes of the Contracts of Insurance and/or the Chubb Policies .
[Again we are absolved from answering Part (ii) of the question] .
\tThree points were taken under this head .
First, the definition of dishonest or fraudulent acts in Insuring Agreement 1 requires that they be committed \twith the manifest intent to cause the  insured  to sustain such loss .
Secondly, there must be a manifest intent \tto obtain financial benefit for the Employee, or for  any other person or organisation .
Thirdly, by Endorsement 8 dishonest or fraudulent acts also means \tthe unlawful taking of insured property to the deprivation of the  insured  .....  \tIf on the true interpretation of the policy the insured were a single entity called the Maxwell group, it would be very arguable that none of those three requirements would be satisfied in the case of a dishonest or fraudulent transfer between companies within the group .
But we have held under issue (F) that that was not the case .
Each of the companies was insured ("A and B and C") as if it alone was the insured ("A or B or C") .
In our judgment the answer to this question is, Yes .
Issue (K) : \tAt what point(s) in time were the Assureds under the Contracts of Insurance and/or the Chubb Policies under a duty to disclose material matters to Insurers and/or Chubb .
\tIt is, we were told, common ground that there is a duty to disclose before a contract of insurance is concluded, before such a contract is renewed, and when a claim is made .
But Mr Milligan for the Claimants except the pension interests submits that the situation on making a claim is conceptually different; non-disclosure then can only lead to the avoidance of a compromise agreement, if there has been one, or a right to recover money paid on the ground of mistake; it does not result in avoidance of the contract of insurance, unless there is fraud, or unless the contract says that it can be avoided for non-disclosure in making a claim .
\tWe regard it an unnecessary for us to express any opinion as to what rights, if any, arise from non-disclosure on making a claim .
\tThe question whether there is a continuing duty of disclosure in any other circumstances is of considerable importance .
We are surprised that in recent times it has only been considered in one decision at first instance:   Black King Shipping Corporation v. Massie (The LITSION PRIDE)  (1985) 1 Ll R 437 .
However, the surprise is tempered when one realises that, in the ordinary way, disclosure would be of little or no benefit to the insurer during the currency of a policy .
Unless it happen before the contract is made, or before renewal, or (perhaps) before a claim is paid, disclosure could only fill the insurer with foreboding that he had made a bad bargain as a loss was likely to occur; he would have no right to cancel the contract of insurance on that account, although we suppose that he might be able to obtain reinsurance .
\tIt is said that the situation is different in this case, because the Insurers - and for that matter the insured - had a right of cancellation .
It is enough to refer only to one of the provisions in that connection .
\t\tSection 16 .
This Policy or any Insuring Agreement may be cancelled by the insured by mailing to the Company written notice stating when thereafter the cancellation shall be effective .
This Policy or any Insuring Agreement may be cancelled by the Company by mailing to the Insured at the address shown in this Policy written notice stating when not less than fifteen days thereafter such cancellation shall be effective .
It is said that disclosure would be of value to an insurer when he has an unfettered right to cancel; hence there is a continuing duty of disclosure .
The argument cannot, as we see it, be anything less than that the duty applies on every day of the policy period, to every material circumstance which becomes known to the insured .
However, we suppose that if the new circumstance were something which led to a loss within fifteen days, it could be said that it was not material as the insurer would have no effective opportunity to cancel .
\tThe Marine Insurance Act 1906 provides: \t17.\tA contract of marine insurance is a contract based upon the utmost good faith, and, if the utmost good faith is not observed by either party, the contract may be avoided by the other party .
18(1).\tSubject to the provisions of this section, the assured must disclose to the insurer, before the contract is concluded, every material circumstance which is known to the assured ... A novice could be forgiven for thinking that the  only  duty of disclosure is by the insured, and that it only applies before the contract is concluded (which could no doubt include the new contract which is made upon renewal) .
But the maxim that mention of one of two things excludes the other must be applied with caution when considering the draftsmanship of Sir Mackenzie Chalmers .
His method of codification was, at any rate at times, to state the effect of rules decided by the courts, and not to pronounce upon points which had not been decided .
\tMr .
Rokison\'s submission is that section 18(1) is merely an example of the general duty that is placed on both parties, at all times, by section 17 .
We can see force in that argument .
But it is questionable whether in practice the law has been treated in that way .
\tIn the  Litsion Pride  the war risks insurance of the vessel contained a term that, in the event of her sailing for, deviating towards or being within a war risks exclusion zone -  \t(A)\t... additional premium shall be paid at the discretion of insurers hereon .
\t(B)\tInformation of such voyage or deviation shall be given to insurers as soon as practicable .. .
There was also, it seems, a clause entitling the insurers to give 14 days notice of cancellation .
\tHirst J .
(a p.510) quoted from the judgment of Scrutton LJ in  Leon v. Casey  (1932) 2 KB 576 at p.579: \t\tThe origin of the order to ships\' papers goes back to the time of Lord Mansfield .
In those days the courts of common law did not give discovery of documents .
If this was wanted the only means of getting it was by a Bill of Equity, and very often an action at law was delayed while the necessary proceedings in equity were taking their course .
In consequence partly of this inconvenience and partly of the fact that insurance has always been regarded as a transaction requiring the utmost good faith between the parties in which the assured is bound to communicate to the insurer every material fact within his knowledge not only at the inception of the risk, but at every subsequent stage while it continues, up to and including the time when he makes his claim, the common law courts invented the order for ship\'s papers, an order which is made as soon as the writ is issued in an action on a policy of marine insurance .
It must however be pointed out that the order for ship\'s papers is now governed by the Rules of the Supreme Court, following criticism by Greer LJ in  Leon v. Casey  (at p.588) that it had become "an unfair and unjust weapon in the hands of the insurer" .
That scarcely sounds like the product of the utmost good faith .
Under O72 r.10 it is now a matter of discretion .
Furthermore Scrutton LJ expressed the view that the duty of disclosure continues throughout the duration of the risk, without limit .
That is not what is now contended for by the Insurers .
\tThe argument of Mr Gilman for the insurers in the  Litsion Pride  was that after the insurance contract was concluded the test should be \t\twhether the misrepresentation or non-disclosure would, if believed by a prudent underwriter, influence him in any relevant decision he had to make, e.g., the fixing of [additional premium], or whether to pay, compromise, or resist a claim ... and also whether or not to invoke the 14 day cancellation clause .
Hirst J. accepted that argument .
He distinguished  Commercial Union Insurance Co v. The Niger Co Ltd  (1922) 13 Ll.L 75 and another case relied on by the insured as follows (at p.511): \t\tWhat the underwriter was seeking to do in these two cases was to fix upon the assured a duty to volunteer information ex post facto concerning new matter, which had come to light after the conclusion of the policy, and which affected the risk already accepted .
The key to these cases is I think to be found in the dictum of Lord Buckmaster in the Niger case that there is no duty on the assured to disclose circumstances arising subsequently which might show that the premium had been accepted at too low a rate .
This in my judgment does not touch the problem with which the Court is concerned in the present case .
It might be said that the Insurers in the present case are seeking to do exactly the same .
Mr Rokison\'s answer is that here the Insurers were entitled to disclosure of any new information that had become available in order to determine whether to exercise their right to cancel .
But the same could be said in the  Litsion Pride  .
Hirst J. continued: \t\tFocusing specifically on the duty in relation to the giving of information of the voyage under the warranty, it seems to me that there is a very close analogy with the position which arose in the  Style  and  Liberian  cases, where the duty was held to apply .
The information is material because it is required to enable the underwriter to make a decision as to the rate of AP, as to facultative reinsurance, and (at all events in the present case) possibly even as to cancellation under the 14 day notice clause .
And later (at p.512): \t\tConsequently, I hold that the duty of utmost good faith applied with its full rigour in relation to the giving of information of the voyage under the warranty .
"The warranty" is a reference to the war risks trading clauses .
\tThe decision of Hirst J. was referred to with approval by Hobhouse J. in  Bank of Nova Scotia v. Hellenic Mutual War Risks Association (Bermuda) Ltd (The GOOD LUCK)  (1988) 1 Ll.R 514 .
However, he held that the Association owed the  bank as mortgagees no duty of the utmost good faith .
His conclusion on the question of a continuing duty of disclosure was as follows (at p.545): \t\tThere is no duty to disclose matters relevant to the making of the contract once the contract had been made; the time has then passed within which they must be disclosed .
The later disclosure of later discovered facts would serve no useful purpose and, therefore, is not required .
By contrast there can be situations which arise subsequently where the duty of utmost good faith makes it necessary that there should be further disclosure because the relevant facts are relevant to the later stages of the contract .
The  Litsion Pride  illustrates such a situation in relation to the making and prosecution of a claim .
Similarly, in the law of partnership there is a continuing duty of the utmost good faith .
Before us the  Litsion Pride  was said to be a case on circumstances where the insurers had an intervening decision to make, rather than a claim to consider .
\tThe Court of Appeal in the  Good Luck  (1990) 1 QB 818 summarised the reasoning of Hobhouse J. at first instance and the decision of Hirst J. in the  Litsion Pride  .
But May LJ delivering the judgment of the court was, as it seems to us, at pains to express no opinion upon whether there was a continuing duty of disclosure:  see pp .
886-888 .
\tRogers J. in the Commercial Court of New South Wales felt no such reticence in  NSW Medical Defence Union Ltd v. Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd  (1985) 4 NSWLR 107 .
We quote the first paragraph of his judgment: \t\tThe plaintiff seeks to strike out pars 15 to 16 inclusive of the first defendant\'s amended defence .
In essence, by those paragraphs, the first defendant, an insurer, seeks to avoid liability under a policy of insurance on the basis that, during the currency of the policy the insured failed to comply with its obligation to act in good faith by failing to disclose certain material facts .
It is claimed by the insurer that the disclosure of the facts was required by it in order to enable it to exercise two alternatives which were available to it .
First, under condition D(v), the insurer had the opportunity of giving thirty days notice to terminate the policy .
Secondly, it had the opportunity throughout of obtaining facultative reinsurance .
It is said that the disclosures, if made, would have borne materially on a decision whether or not either or both of these opportunities should be availed of .
The judge rejected those arguments .
He observed that the ability to cancel was thought to be quite irrelevant by Lord Buckmaster in the  Niger  case; and that the  Litsion Pride  was concerned with an express obligation in the policy to supply information if trading in an excluded zone .
\tWe now turn to the  Niger  case, first in the Court of Appeal before Bankes, Warrington and Atkin LJJ .
(1921) 7 Ll.L .
239 .
We must quote a lengthy passage from the judgment of Bankes LJ (at p.245): \t\tThe evidence shows that this business of covering these goods has been carried on by some, at any rate, of these Underwriters for very many years, and that until comparatively recently the practice was to enter into a fresh cover every year, and, of course, as long as that was the practice every year, the assured came under the obligation, before he entered into a fresh contract, to make a disclosure of any material facts which had come into existence, or which were in existence, and which were material to be known to the Underwriters .
But there came a time when, I suppose for convenience, the parties altered the character of the contract, and altered it probably to an extent that they did not appreciate .
What they did was, instead of having a fresh cover every year, and a fresh contract every year, they provided that the existing contract should go on until terminated by three months\' notice;  and that, in my opinion, established a condition of things under which this obligation to make a disclosure ceased, because there was a concluded contract, and a contract which remained and continued a concluded contract until it was in fact put an end to;  and if the obligation on the assured is only to disclose matters which have come into existence and are material to be known before the contract is concluded, then the doctrine has no application to this case .
But Mr Leslie Scott contended, first of all, that this was an exceptional case, and although he could not quote any authority for his proposition, he suggested that the contract of insurance being  uberrimae fidei , this Court ought to extend (at least, so I understood him) the doctrine so as to meet a case of this kind, in order that the Underwriters should have the opportunity of giving the three months\' notice when in fact the character or extent of the risk had altered .
We asked him to formulate what the effect of introducing such a doctrine would be, and I think he must have felt himself in a difficulty in doing that, but ultimately I understood him to say that, if there was non-disclosure and an alteration of risk while the contract was a continuing contract, the Underwriter would have the right to exercise the option retrospectively when he became aware of the facts, as from the time when the disclosure ought to have been made, or alternatively, the contract should be treated as automatically concluded at the expiration of three months from that time .
Well, I think that the statement of the consequences, which Mr Leslie Scott desires, indicate that this is not a case in which the doctrine can or ought to be applied .
It may be that the Underwriters did not appreciate the difference in their position which they were making by the alteration in the form of the contract, and all I can say is that, if people enter into contracts of insurance for long periods, it would be a wise precaution to insert some provision requiring notice to be given them if the nature of the risk does alter or vary appreciably .
It seems to us clear that Bankes LJ was rejecting the submission that a continuing duty of disclosure existed by reason of the right to cancel .
He may  also  have been saying, as Mr Rokison submits, that the existence of such a duty would on the facts have been of no avail to the insurers in that particular case .
But that does not detract from his view that there was no continuing duty .
\tIn our judgment that must also have been the view of the House of Lords in the  Niger  case (1922) 13 Ll.L .
75 .
In particular Lord Atkinson said (at p.79) \t\tIt would appear to me that in some of the arguments addressed to your Lordships on behalf of the underwriters, the fact has not been kept in mind that the cover is by the terms of the slip I have read a continuous cover, not limited in duration, save by the fact that it may be terminated by three months\' notice .
I for myself beg to say that I can see no reason why the principle laid down in the cases I have cited as to the disclosure by the assured of material facts between the signing of the cover and the issue of the policy should not apply to the continuous cover created in this case .
Lord Sumner, in connection with an argument on this or another point of non-disclosure, said (at p.82): \tThis would turn what is an indispensable shield for the Underwriter into an engine of oppression against the insured .
We would echo that sentiment .
Whilst there are no doubt cases where a defence of non-disclosure is fully justified, there are also in our experience some where it is not .
We should hesitate to enlarge the scope for oppression by establishing a duty to disclose throughout the period of a contract of insurance, merely because it contains (as is by no means uncommon) a right of cancellation for the insurer .
\tIt remains to consider two cases on what are called fidelity bonds or guarantees .
It seems that these are given to an employer as a guarantee of the fidelity of an employee; and that non-disclosure of dishonesty of the servant after the contract is made does have an effect on the contract of suretyship .
In  Phillips v Foxall  (1872) LR 8 QB 666 at p.674 there is this passage in the majority judgment: \t\t... it seems to us equally reasonable to suppose that it never could have entered into the contemplation of the parties that, after the servant\'s dishonesty in the service had been discovered, the guarantee should continue to apply to his future conduct, when the master chose for his own purposes to continue the servant in his employ without the knowledge or assent of the surety .
If the obligation of the surety is continuing, we think the obligation of the creditor is equally so, and that the representation and understanding on which the contract was originally founded continue to apply to it during its continuance and until its termination .
\t\tIf the guarantee at its inception was founded, as suggested, by Lord Eldon in  Smith v. Bank of Scotland , on the trustworthiness of the servant, so far as that was known to both parties, as soon as his dishonesty is discovered and becomes known to the master, the whole foundation for the continuance of the contract as regards the surety fails .
That doctrine is evidently based on an interpretation of the contract, and on the law of suretyship, rather than on a duty of disclosure imposed from outside by the law as in the case of a contract of insurance .
As Mr Phillips said, it arises under an implied term, and not from a duty of the utmost good faith .
It was considered in the American case of  Sumitomo Bank of California v. Iwasaki  (1968) 447 Pac R (2nd) 956 at p.958, where Tobriner AJ said: \t\tWe shall explain why we adopt the Restatement rule .
That rule provides that each time the creditor accepts the continuing offer of a surety on a continuing guaranty by extending further credit to the principal debtor, the creditor owes a duty to the surety to disclose facts known by the creditor if the creditor has reason to believe that those facts materially increase the risk beyond that which the surety intended to assume and that those facts are unknown to the surety .
(Rest., Security 124 .
subd .
(1), com .
c. pp .
327-328,330. .
\tIn our judgment that doctrine does not apply to insurance contracts in general, or to fidelity insurance in particular, although the insurer may have some other remedy if the insured knowingly maintains in his employment a dishonest servant .
\tWe would answer this question by saying that there was no continuing duty of disclosure during the currency of any year of insurance by reason of the right to cancel .
If and in so far as a contrary view was expressed in the  Litsion Pride , we cannot agree .
Issue L - the Limits \tThis last issue is particularly difficult, largely owing to the obscurity of the contract wording .
Despite the assistance of counsel  we have found difficulty understanding the questions, let alone deciding them .
\tThe question ordered by Waller J. was not that argued by Counsel or answered by Potter J .
He posed three questions, as follows: \t(1)\tDo the policy limits apply separately to each company within the Group, i.e .
as a limit per insured company, or is there a single limit applicable to all companies within the group .
\t(2)\tDo the limits apply separately and non-cumulatively to each policy year, or does the aggregate limit of liability apply regardless of the number of years that the policy continued in force .
\t(3)\tDoes the limit apply without aggregation to "any one loss" or is there an aggregate limit of \xc2\xa31m on all claims in respect of which the same employee is concerned or implicated .
\tThe limits referred to are those which are to be found on what we call the front of the policies, as follows: 3.\t\t\t\tTable of Limits of Liability Insuring Agreement I Employee Dishonesty Coverage - Form A  \xc2\xa31,000,000* Insuring Agreement II Loss Inside the Premises Coverage \xc2\xa31,000,000* Insuring Agreement III Loss Outside the Premises Coverage \xc2\xa31,000,000* Insuring Agreement IV Money Orders and Counterfeit Paper Currency Coverage \xc2\xa31,000,000* Insuring Agreement V Depositors Forgery Coverage \xc2\xa31,000,000* Added by Endorsements: \xc2\xa0 \xc2\xa0 Insuring Agreement \xc2\xa0 \xc2\xa0 Agreement VI Computer & Funds Transfer Fraud \xc2\xa31,000,000* Deductible: Agreements I, IV, V and VI \xc2\xa320,000 each and every loss *any one loss \xc2\xa0 Insuring Agreements II and III \xc2\xa310,000 each and every loss \xc2\xa0   Question L (1) - Separate limits for each company .
\tDespite emphatic protests by Mr Rokison whenever the topic was mentioned, once it had been decided under issue F that each company was separately insured the answer to this question must be that in general there was a separate limit for each company .
We asked Mr Rokison whether there would be two limits if employee A caused loss to company X and employee B caused loss to company Y; his answer was that there would be two limits, each of \xc2\xa31 million at the primary layer .
\tThe problem arises in the special case of loss caused by the same employee to two companies .
That is specifically dealt with in section 11 -  \t\tThe Company\'s total liability (a) under Insuring Agreement 1 for all loss caused by any Employee or in which such Employee is concerned or implicated or (b) under Insuring Agreement V for all loss by forgery or alteration or in which such person is concerned or implicated ... is limited to the applicable amount of insurance specified in the Table of Limits of Liability or endorsement amendatory thereto.The liability of the Company for loss sustained by any or all of the Insured shall not exceed the amount for which the Company would be liable had all such loss been sustained by any one of the Insured .
Question L(2) - Separate limits for each year .
\tWe have no difficulty in concluding, as the judge did, that there were separate limits in each year for which the policy is renewed and a premium paid .
A clause in section 11 of the policy provided: \t\tRegardless of the number of years this Policy shall continue in force and the number of premiums which shall be payable or paid, the limit of the Company\'s liability as specified in the Table of Limits of Liability shall not be cumulative from year to year or period to period .
\tThere was some discussion as to whether the clause was dealing with a possible claim to carry forward an unused limit or part of a limit from year 1 to year 2 .
That cannot have been contemplated, and one wonders whether the clause was designed or needed to prohibit it .
\tHowever, the question remains whether the limit applies to all loss of the relevant insured in a particular policy year, or in some other way .
\tIt is common ground, and stated both in section 1 of the policy and endorsement 3 (which replaces it) that the dishonest and fraudulent acts referred to in Insuring Agreement 1 must be Committed "during the policy period" .
The question then is whether \t(a)\tthe limit applies to all loss which flows from the conduct of a particular employee, even if he commits further dishonest and fraudulent acts in a later year which cause further loss, or \t(b)\tthe limit applies to all loss caused by dishonest and fraudulent acts of a particular employee in the policy year in question, the loss being sustained or discovered in the policy period or the discovery period .
\tWe can see no ground for the wide interpretation under (a), which in effect means that there is no new cover in respect of the employee in question although a premium is paid to renew the policy for a further year .
Mr Rokison submits that the limit is expressed to be for "any one loss", and that dishonest conduct of one employee is one loss .
In our judgment if the Insurers wished to achieve that result it was for them to say so with at least a minimal degree of clarity .
The provision that the limit shall not be cumulative from year to year can as well be read as saying that  loss  in subsequent years shall be subject to the one limit as that further dishonest or fraudulent acts shall be .
\tThere is also what has been called the straddling provision: \tLIMIT OF LIABILITY UNDER THIS POLICY AND PRIOR INSURANCE \t\tWith respect to loss caused by any person (whether one of the Employees or not) or in which such person is concerned or implicated or which is chargeable to any Employee as provided in Section 4 and which occurs partly during the Policy Period and partly during the period of other bonds or policies issued by the Company to the Insured or to any predecessor in interest of the insured and terminated or cancelled or allowed to expire and in which the period for discovery has not expired at the time any such loss thereunder is discovered, the total liability of the Company under this Policy and under such other bonds or policies shall not exceed, in the aggregate, the amount carried under the applicable Insuring Agreement of this Policy on such loss or the amount available to the Insured under such other bonds or policies, as limited by the terms and conditions thereof, for any such loss, if the latter amount be the larger .
That, as it seems to us, covers loss suffered partly during the period of one policy and partly in the period of another .
It does not touch upon the present problem .
\tMr .
Rokison also relied on the provisions as to a deductible in endorsement 4: \tAll loss caused by acts committed by any person or in which such person is concerned or implicated and/or arising from any one occurrence (as set forth in Section II of the policy) will be considered a single loss for the purpose of this endorsement .
If a loss is covered in part under this  \tpolicy and in part under a prior similar policy or bond superseded by this policy, the Deductible Amounts(s) applicable to such loss under this policy will be reduced by the amount of any deductible(s) actually applied to such loss under such other policy or bond .
There is perhaps a slightly stronger argument that all loss in that clause includes loss from fraudulent or dishonest acts in a subsequent year .
But it is only marginal, and not in our judgment sufficient to carry the day in relation to limits .
\tWe would uphold the judge\'s conclusion that the limits apply separately and non-cumulatively to each policy year in the sense that we have indicated .
Question L(3)  - limit for each loss or each employee .
\tWithin any policy year, is the limit to apply to all fraudulent or dishonest acts of one employee, or to each loss identified in some other way .
This arises on the Claimants\' cross-appeal .
\tThe answer is in our judgment plain .
Section II says that the limit is to apply to all loss caused by any employee or in which such employee is concerned or implicated .
But that is subject to section 12 in respect of loss straddling two policy periods .
Conclusion \tThe appeal and cross-appeal should be dismissed .
So should the Insurers\' application for leave to appeal on certain aspects of the judge\'s rulings as to the admissibility of evidence .
No argument was addressed to us in support of that application .
\tThere remains a cross-appeal of the claimants, by leave of the judge, against his order for costs .
This order was that the costs be reserved .
He was apparently persuaded to take that course on the ground that it did not yet appear how relevant the preliminary issues would be to the ultimate result .
We are afraid that we do not regard that as a good reason .
The Insurers did not have to rely on the points which were raised as preliminary issues if they did not want to, instead of which the Insurers defended them (for the most part) here and below .
As the price of failure, the costs  below on the argument of preliminary issues should be paid by the Insurers in any event .
\tWe would not order that the costs should be taxed and paid forthwith .
The parties should proceed to trial .
\t\tORDER:  APPEAL DISMISSED .
CROSS-APPEAL, SAVE IN RELATION TO THE COSTS, WILL BE SET ASIDE .
COSTS BELOW TO BE PAID BY THE INSURERS IN ANY EVENT .
THE APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL ON CERTAIN ASPECTS OF THE JUDGE\'S RULINGS AS TO THE ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE DISMISSED .
PARTIES SHOULD PROCEED TO TRIAL.    .
b'This is an appeal by leave from an arbitration award of Mr John Maskell dated 10th January 1997 .
It concerns the proper construction of time charterparty dated 2nd August 1995 made on the ASBATIME form, with amendments, between the claimant owners and the respondent charterers of m/s North Sea .
Owners\' claim against the charterers was for alleged wrongful cancellation of the charter .
The arbitrator rejected the claim, holding that charterers were entitled to cancel the charter for non-delivery by the time stipulated in the cancelling clause, clause 14.\r\n   The charter contained the following relevant clauses;  I have highlighted in bold the words typed into the printed form:\r\n   "[Lines 1 to 25 - Owners, Description of Vessel and Charterers]           THIS CHARTER PARTY made .... between Owners of ... .motorship NORTH SEA of .... tons gross  tonnage  and  See Clause 55  tons net, having engines of  See Clause 55  horsepower and with hull, machinery and equipment in a thoroughly efficient state, and classed  See Clause 55  of about.... cubic feet grain/bale capacity .... and about  21081  metric tons deadweight  summer  capacity (cargo and bunkers, including fresh water and stores not exceeding .... long/metric tons) on a salt water draft of  See Clause 55  on summer freeboard, inclusive of permanent bunkers, which are of the capacity of about  See Clause 55  fuel oil and capable of steaming, under good weather conditions about 16 knots on a consumption of about 41 metric tons of  IFO 380 CSI  +  abt .
3 mts ifo at sea  -  See also Clause 55  now trading and Charterers [Lines 27 to 33 - Duration] The Owners agree to let and the Charterers agree to hire the vessel from the time of delivery for  1 timecharter trip via ports, always via good and safe ports/berths, always afloat, always within I. W. L. duration about 15-25 days w. o. g. Intended itenarary [sic] w. o. g. HongKong/Kobe/Nagoya/Yokohama/Oakland/Long Beach  ...." [Lines 34 to 45 - Delivery] Vessel shall be placed at the disposal of the Charterers  at Charterers\' berth Hong Kong or dlosp [1]  Hong Kong in Charterers\' option any time day/night Saturdays/Sundays and holidays included  as the Charterers may direct .
Acceptance of delivery of the vessel by Charterers shall not constitute a waiver of Charterers\' rights under this Charter Party .
Vessel on her delivery shall be ready to receive  container  with clean-swept holds and tight, staunch, strong and in every way fitted for  container  service, having water ballast and with sufficient power to operate all crew for a vessel of her tonnage), to be employed in carrying lawful  containerized  merchandise .... [Clause 3 - Bunkers on Delivery and Redelivery] The Charterers on delivery, and the Owners on redelivery, shall take over and pay for all fueled and diesel oil remaining on board the vessel as hereunder .
The vessel shall be delivered with:  See Clause 56 .
The vessel shall be redelivered with:   See Clause 56 .
[Clause 7 - Spaces Available]          The whole reach of the vessel\'s holds, decks, and usual places of loading ...   shall be a2t the Charterers\' disposal .... [Clause 14 - Laydays/Cancelling] If required by Charterers, time shall not commence before  5th August 1995 00.01 hours  and should vessel not have  been delivered  on or before  10th August 1995 12.00 hours  Charterers or their agents shall have the option of cancelling this Charter .
If the vessel cannot be delivered by the cancelling date the Charterers, if required, to declare within 48 hours after receiving notice thereof whether they cancel or will take delivery of the vessel .
[Clause 21 - Cargo gear]  Owners shall maintain the cargo gear of the ship which is as follows:  See Clause 55 [Clause 40 - Blacklisting] Owners guarantee vessel is neither blacklisted by United Arab Republic, Syria, or any other Arabian State, due to previous calls at Israel, nor blacklisted by US Authorities due to previous calls at Cuba .... [Clause 55 -Vessel\'s description]   .... [Clause 56 - Bunker]          Vessel to be delivered with about 700mts HFO and about 100 mts MDO, and about Units MDO, and to be redelivered with approx .
same quantities as on delivery .
Any minor differences between redelivery and delivery quantities to be settled together with final hire statement at prices according to platts mean price for Hongkong ruling on day of redelivery .
[Clause 59 - Deratization] Owners to supply valid "certificat de deratisation" on delivery of the vessel, and if this does not cover the whole period of the timecharter and/or "deratisation" is necessary, cost of same and detention to be for Owners\' account, always provided deratisation not necessary on account of cargo carried, if any on board when "deratisation" to take place. .
The award finds that the master on 9th August 1995 gave twenty-four hours\' notice of intention to deliver the vessel under the charter at 1000 hours on 10th August 1995, and that\r\n   "10 .
Various requests were made to the Charterers inquiring as to where they wanted the vessel delivered, but no instructions were forthcoming .
The vessel was at an anchorage on 10th August and by noon it was still there and neither at the Charterers\' berth nor steaming from the pilot station .
Since the vessel was at neither spot mentioned in the Charter, nor, according to the Charterers, was ready, the Charterers exercised their option to cancel .
11 .
There are two additional facts that are relevant .
The first is that the On-Hire Surveyor certified that bunkering was complete at 1400 hours on the 10th when 722 tonnes of HFO, 89 tonnes of IFO and 107 tonnes of MDO were on board .
The second is that it was alleged .... and not denied, that from the physical point of view the vessel was ready to sail at 1000 hours. .
Taking the two grounds on which charterers relied to justify cancellation, identified at the end of paragraph 10, the arbitrator rejected the first, on the basis that charterers\' own failure to select the place for delivery prevented them relying on the vessel\'s failure to present at either place as non-delivery under the cancellation clause .
The arbitrator accepted charterers\' second ground, holding that the failure to have on board the stipulated quantities of bunkers by 1200 hours on 10th August 1995 meant that\r\n   "the vessel was not in a deliverable state so as to comply with the Charter requirements and the Charterers had the option to cancel which they exercised" .
Before me, Mr Southern for the charterers does not challenge the arbitrator\'s conclusion on the first ground .
Mr Hamblen Q. C. for owners submits that the arbitrator should have gone further .
Charterers\' obligation to select the place of delivery was, he submits, a precondition to owners\' ability and duty to deliver, and accordingly neither the time for delivery nor any right to cancel ever arose .
Charterers\' responses are that (i) failing any such selection by them, the vessel fell to be treated as placed at their disposal as and where she lay at anchorage in Hong Kong - representing, they say, a more favourable position for owners (in that it was easier for them to have the vessel ready there) than any berth or place where a pilot might have been dropped; alternatively, (ii) if charterers had selected a place for delivery, the vessel still could not have been delivered there in time with the stipulated quantities of bunkers, so that they would anyway have had the right to cancel; the operation of the cancelling clause should not, they submit, depend upon their identifying a place for delivery if there was no point in doing so, in particular when it was clear that the vessel could not deliver there in time with the appropriate bunkers;  failure at an appropriate stage to identify a place for delivery could only be material if it led to inability on owners\' part to deliver there in time with appropriate bunkers .
The arbitrator must have accepted one or other of such arguments, although he did not make clear which.\r\n   In my judgment, neither of charterers\' arguments on the first ground is correct .
The making of delivery depends under lines 34 to 45 upon charterers identifying where delivery is to take place .
The only charterparty agreement is that time runs from the placing of the vessel at charterers\' disposal at the place so selected by charterers .
There is no basis on which even owners, still less charterers when they were in default of selection, can claim to treat delivery as having been made on any other basis or at any other place .
It is of course the case that a time charter of this description does not import any transfer of possession (see e.g .
Cheikh Boutros Selim el-Khourv v. Ceylon Shipping Lines .
Ltd. (The "Madeleine")  [1967] 2 Ll .
R. 224, per Roskill J. at p. 238) .
But the express language of lines 34 to 45 requires delivery to be effected by placing of the vessel at the charterers\' disposal at a place to be selected by charterers .
Unless and until charterers select such a place, owners cannot deliver in accordance with the charter, although they may have a claim for damages against time charterers for failure duly to select the place for delivery (see e.g .
Anders Utkilens Rederi v. Co. Tunisienne de Navigation of Tunis (The "Golfstraum"  [1976] 2 Ll .
R. 97, where the damages claimed consisted of lost hire) .
In the present case, the time for delivery never arose, and there is thus no basis on which charterers could assert, in the context of the cancelling clause, that the vessel was due to be, but had not been, delivered.\r\n   It does not assist charterers to argue that, if they had identified a place for delivery, owners would not have delivered the vessel in time and in the right condition at that place .
The operation of the cancelling clause depends on delivery actually being due and not being made when due .
Charterers\' contention that they were under no obligation to select the place for delivery, since it was clear that owners would not be able to deliver in the right condition and in time at any place so selected, has no basis .
In practical terms, it would lead after the event to speculative arguments whether charterers were right about this .
In principle, there is no way in which charterers were relieved of their obligation to identify the place for delivery, merely because they considered, however correctly, that owners would be unable to effect delivery there by the time specified in the cancelling clause .
It was not suggested that any inability in fact to deliver there by that time with the agreed bunkers (or any indication that there may have been of any intention to deliver there by that time without the agreed bunkers) involved any breach of charter, still less a breach of condition or repudiation by owners which, if duly treated as such, could have relieved charterers from further performance .
The effect of the cancelling clause was simply that charterers would have a right to cancel, and owners would be vulnerable to loss of the charter, if, and only if, due delivery was not made by the time specified in the clause .
Costs of any steps taken to effect an abortive tender (if delivery is tendered late and charterers cancel) fall on owners, not on charterers .
In the present case, charterers\' failure to identify any place for delivery means in my judgment that delivery never became due at all, and charterers\' claim to invoke the cancellation clause was unjustified.\r\n   For these reasons, this appeal succeeds on the first point raised by Mr Hamblen on behalf of the owners .
For completeness, I also consider the second point .
The issue is whether failure to have on board at 1200 hours on 10th August 1995 bunkers in quantities complying with clauses 3 and 56 invalidated any delivery which was or could then have been made, and justified charterers in cancelling the charter for non-delivery under clause 14 .
Clause 14 as amended applies simply "should the vessel not have been delivered" by that time .
It is common ground that this must at least refer back to the provisions of lines 34 to 45, expressly dealing with delivery .
If the vessel on delivery was not, by the time stipulated in clause 14, "ready to receive  container  with clean-swept holds and tight, staunch, strong and in every way fitted for  container  service, having water ballast and with sufficient power to operate all cargo-handling gear simultaneously (and with full complement of officers and crew for a vessel of her tonnage)", her delivery could thus be rejected and the charterers could cancel .
The case was not put before the arbitrator on the basis of any suggested breach of lines 34 to 45 .
The only relevant argument which he addresses (and which he accepted) depends on clauses 3 and 56 and was that delivery with bunkers complying with these clauses was also required to avoid exposure to cancellation under clause 14.\r\n   In support of this conclusion, charterers point out that clauses 3 and 56 deal expressly with the position at the time of delivery, as do lines 34 to 45 and clause 14 .
There is thus, they submit, no difficulty in treating delivery under clause 14 as meaning delivery in accordance with clauses 3 and 56 as well as lines 34 to 45 .
Further, they submit, there is good reason to do so .
Read with clause 14, the specific provisions of clauses 3 and 56 would obviate any arguments (which in the context of a time-charter for a vaguely defined trip could involve obvious difficulty) as to the extent of the bunkers necessary to make the vessel fit under lines 34 to 45 .
Clauses 3 and 56 would in effect crystallize in relation to bunkers the requirements which the vessel must satisfy if the vessel is to count as duly delivered for the purposes of the cancellation clause.\r\n   Owners submit that readiness or compliance in other respects with lines 34 to 45 is necessarily a matter of fact and degree .
They also acknowledge that the combination of lines 34 to 45 and clause 14 may on occasion work stringently against owners, as where, for example, some relatively small aspect of unreadiness to load enables cancellation .
But that, they submit, is no reason to relate to the cancelling clause a standard provision dealing with the quantities of bunkers to be on board at delivery, in a manner which would extend the right of cancellation to circumstances where the discrepancy in bunkers might be quite immaterial to the vessel\'s actual trading .
Further, they submit, there could only exist a right to cancel for a discrepancy in bunkers on board, if the discrepancy was shown to have some "real significance" from a commercial viewpoint .
The last submission relies on reasoning of Webster J. in  Athenian Tankers Management S. A. v. Pvrena Shipping Inc. (The "Arianna")  [1987] 2 Ll .
R. 376 in relation to defects having no effect on the safety of the vessel or security or integrity of her cargo, which might nonetheless be said to render her  prima facie  unready .
Shortage of bunkers could, of course, in some circumstances render a vessel unsafe and imperil her cargo, but here the award recites in paragraph 11 that from the physical point of view the vessel was ready to sail at 1000 hours, and still more materially in paragraph 18 that\r\n   "It may well be that the vessel had more than sufficient fuel to reach Japan and she could take on more bunkers there, ...." Although this may not itself amount to a positive finding in owners\' favour, the award certainly contains no finding that any discrepancy in the extent of the bunkers on board by 1200 hours on 10th August 1995 would have had any real commercial significance .
At one stage charterers suggested that, if the point became material, the case should be remitted to the arbitrator for make positive findings one way or the other, as to whether or not there was any commercial significance in the discrepancy .
They raised however no case that it was of actual commercial significance before the arbitrator .
The owners\' effectively undisputed allegations were that the vessel had on board as at 1200 hours on 10th August 1995 approximately twice the quantity of fuel required to proceed to all contemplated loadports in Japan, where charterers anyway intended to refuel her prior to her cross-Pacific voyage .
At the end of the argument, Mr Southern for the charterers conceded that no case had ever been raised before the arbitrator of lack of compliance with lines 34 to 45, and that there was no basis for remission in that context.\r\n   The charterers accept that there are some provisions in the charterparty which would fall to be complied with at the time of any delivery, but non-compliance with which would still not justify cancellation .
As examples, one may take owners\' obligations to comply with the very detailed provisions regarding the vessel\'s description, capacities and capabilities introduced by lines 1 to 25 and clause 55 .
Owners also refer to clauses 21 (maintenance of cargo gear), 40 (blacklisting) and 43 (safety in ballast) as potential further examples, which I need not consider .
Charterers, as I understand it, distinguish any such provisions in two ways .
First, they are not specifically related to delivery in the same way as the obligation under clauses 3 and 56 regarding the quantities of bunkers to be on board on delivery .
Secondly, they go to permanent, as distinct from variable, characteristics of the vessel .
The first distinction has some force, but in other respects clauses 3 and 56 are not so confined .
Clause 3, into the scheme of which clause 56 is in effect set, starts by assuming that delivery has been validly effected ("The Charterers on delivery .... shall take over and pay for all fuel and diesel oil remaining on board the vessel ....") .
Clauses 3 and 56 then provide for the quantities with which the vessel is to be delivered .
Both clauses also deal with redelivery .
The basis and logic of the second distinction are not obvious and it appear open to the objection that a number of the matters covered by lines 1 to 25 and clause 55 (and indeed the other clauses mentioned) would be capable of being rectified.\r\n   Both Devlin J. and Tucker L. J. in  Noemijulia Steamship Co. Ltd. v. Minister of Food  [1951] 1 K. B .
223 drew attention to the nature of a cancelling clause as a "forfeiture clause", which should not be "applied lightly" .
That was in a context where the issue was on whom the onus lay to show matters relevant to its application and what the test of readiness to load was .
But, because the clause is a forfeiture clause, caution is also appropriate in extending its application by reference to provisions of the charter outside the language of lines 34 to 45 .
In  The Madeleine  Roskill J. had to construe a cancelling clause, clause 22, in a time charter in similar language to the present .
It applied "should the vessel not be delivered by the 2nd day of May 1957 ...." .
Mr Staughton, as he then was, argued for owners that delivery under clause 22 imported no more than a tender of or placing or offering to place the vessel at the charterer\'s disposal .
Roskill J. rejected the argument, holding that the charter must be construed as a whole and that "delivered" in clause 22 related to the delivery provisions of clause 1, whereby owners agreed to let and charterers to hire the vessel for three months "from the time .... the Vessel is delivered and placed at the disposal of the Charterers between 9 a. m. and 6 p. m. pr between 9 a. m. and 2 p.m. if on Saturday, at CALCUTTA in such available berth where she can safely lie always afloat, she being in every way fitted for ordinary cargo service. .
Clause 22 thus provided a right of cancellation if the vessel was not, when tendered for delivery, "in every way fitted for ordinary cargo service".\r\n   In  The Arianna  the cancelling clause applied "should vessel not be ready in accordance with the provisions hereof" .
Counsel, myself as it happened, argued unsuccessfully before both the tribunal and Webster J. that it should be related to all provisions of the charter applicable at the delivery date .
The arbitrators disagreed (see page 380) on the basis that it was "specifically related to those provisions of the charter dealing with readiness for delivery", and in particular clause 3 (the parallel of lines 34 to 45 in the present charter) .
Webster J. also concluded that the words "ready in accordance with the provisions hereof" referred to readiness under clause 3 (see page 387).\r\n   The reference to readiness in the unamended printed form of clause 14, which is one tie between the provisions of clause 14 and lines 34 to 45 in the printed form, has been deleted .
There is however no reason to think that the deletion was with the present problem in mind, rather than simply to remove the requirement of notice of readiness .
Taking clause 14 as it stands, as one must, the use of the word "delivered" still naturally refers back to lines 34 to 45, dealing expressly with delivery, in the same way as the cancelling clause in  The Madeleine  referred back to clause 1 .
By contrast, clauses 3 and 56 are neither part of the primary delivery provisions in lines 34 to 45, nor referred to in clause 14.\r\n   The conjunction of a cancelling clause and primary delivery provisions like lines 34 to 45 is natural and familiar .
If the cancelling clause had been intended to relate to other specific obligations, such as the obligation to have certain quantities of bunkers on board on delivery, this could have been made clear .
It would have been easy to include a specific reference to compliance on delivery with clauses 3 and/or 56 in either lines 34 to 45 or clause 14 itself .
It may be, as charterers submit, that there could be advantages in terms of simplicity and certainty in such a link .
On the other hand, there could be objections in terms of rigidity and the expansion of the right to cancel to circumstances where the discrepancy in bunkers was of no conceivable relevance .
If a vessel to be "delivered" under clause 14 requires bunkers complying with clauses 3 and 56, I can see no scope for any qualification limiting the requirement to circumstances where the discrepancy is of "real commercial significance".\r\n   I add, though the conclusion which I have reached in no way depends on this, that, if compliance with clauses 3 and 56 were required, there would be some difficulty in seeing why tender with bunkers in  excess  of the quantities specified in clause 56 would not justify cancellation, especially since clause 56 requires the vessel "to be redelivered with approx .
same quantities as on redelivery" and calls for settlement of any differences between delivery and redelivery quantities at Platts mean price ruling on redelivery .
The very fact that this difficulty would exist, whether or not it could then be overcome as a matter of construction, may itself be a further pointer towards the irrelevance of clauses 3 and 56 in the context of clause 14.\r\n   The proper construction of this particular charterparty is, as I see it, as follows .
The obligation regarding bunkers on delivery imposed by clauses 3 and 56 is, if broken, readily capable of giving rise to a claim for damages .
There is no reason to treat the charter as conferring in respect of it the more draconian remedy of cancellation which would apply automatically if its performance was directly relevant under clause 14 .
Properly understood, clause 14 operates by reference to lines 34 to 45 .
If the vessel on tender for delivery lacked bunkers, to an extent which meant that she did not comply with some aspect of lines 34 to 45, cancellation under clause 14 would become a possibility .
In that context, the question whether the deficiency was of real commercial significance could arise .
In the present case, charterers\' only contention before the arbitrator was that mere non-compliance with clauses 3 and 56 automatically entitled them to cancel .
They did not seek to justify their cancellation with reference to lines 34 to 45 at all .
The award contains nothing to enable them to do so now, and there is no basis for remission.\r\n   In these circumstances, I would, if it had arisen, also have allowed the appeal on the second ground, to which the major part of the submissions before me was directed.\r\n   Subject to any observations which either party wishes to make on the precise form of the order, the interim final award of Mr Maskell dated 10th January 1997 in charterers\' favour will be set aside and replaced by an award in owners\' favour on liability and costs in the form set out in paragraph 1 of the notice of motion dated 30th January 1997, and the matter will be remitted to the arbitrator for him to assess damages for the charterers\' breach of contract.\r\n   18th April 1997 Note 1\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0i .
e.  dropping last outward sea pilot \xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back]  .
b'MR .
JUSTICE NEUBERGER: INTRODUCTION This is an application by Mr Holland, the liquidator of Harvard Securities Limited ("Harvard"), for directions under Section 112 of the Insolvency Act 1986 in relation to certain shares in Australian and United States companies held by Harvard .
The central issue raised by the application, namely the ownership of the beneficial interest in the shares, raises a point of some general significance and, at least to my mind, of some difficulty.\r\n   THE FACTS Until about 1988, Harvard was a licensed dealer in securities and an investment adviser; it conducted stock broking activities for clients through a registered stockbroker or market maker .
Following the coming into force of the Financial Services Act 1988, the SIB was unable to grant the company full authorization, and, by the end of September 1988, it decided to cease trading and to wind up its business .
Shortly thereafter, the applicant, Mr Holland ("the liquidator"), was appointed liquidator.\r\n   Between 1980 and 1986 Harvard purchased shares in various Australian and US companies ("the Australian shares" and "the US shares" respectively) and sold them on to clients .
It also purchased Canadian shares for sale to clients, but they play no part in these proceedings because they are all worthless .
Harvard also purported to sell shares to clients in 1987 and 1988, but no shares were actually acquired by Harvard during this period.\r\n   When Harvard purchased a block of Australian or US shares with a view to selling them on to clients in parcels of shares, it was its practice not to register each of the parcel of shares in the name of the relevant client .
This was because of the disadvantages in terms of the cost of registration, the delay in registration, the inconvenience of stock being registered in small quantities, and the lower price obtainable on sale if stock was registered in small quantities.\r\n   The evidence as to Harvard\'s communications with clients regarding the acquisition of Australian and US shares is limited .
This is due to a number of factors, and in particular the lapse of time since the shares were acquired, the lapse of time since Harvard went into liquidation, the fact that Harvard\'s records were not in particularly good order, and the fact that the great majority of Harvard\'s records had been shredded .
In these circumstances, I think the right basis upon which I should proceed is to assume that such communications as I have seen passing between Harvard and its clients relating to the acquisition, sale and holding of the Australian and US shares are typical, and indeed representative, of such communications passing between Harvard and its clients.\r\n   The Australian shares are all registered, as opposed to bearer, shares .
Since 1986, all the Australian shares have been held in the name of ANZ Nominees ("ANZ"), a subsidiary of Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited, and the share certificates have always been held in Melbourne, Australia .
ANZ accepts that, as against Harvard, it is no more than a mere nominee for Harvard; ANZ has agreed to be bound by any order which the court makes in these proceedings.\r\n   Once a block of Australian shares was acquired by Harvard, individual parcels of those shares would be sold on to Harvard\'s clients .
The sale would be recorded by Harvard by way of book entry, and the share certificate, in respect of the whole block of shares, would remain in the name and physical possession of ANZ in Australia.\r\n   Harvard would issue contract notes to clients confirming that the individual parcel of shares allocated in its books to that client had been "bought by order of" the client; the contract note indicated the number of shares bought, the purchase price, and the total consideration .
The client was sent the contract note in respect of his parcel of shares more or less contemporaneously with Harvard\'s acquisition of the block, and the client was expected to pay on receipt of the contract note .
In a typical letter to a client, Harvard confirmed that shares in a particular Australian company "are held in nominee name for our account on your behalf" .
In respect of each block of Australian shares it acquired, Harvard kept records in which there were entries, against the name of each client, showing the number of shares, the date of sale to the client, and, where appropriate, the issue of any bonus or rights shares, the date on which any or all of the shares were sold back to Harvard, and the balance (if any) of the holding.\r\n   So far as the US shares are concerned, they are also registered shares .
They are registered in the name of the English Association of American Bond and Shareholders Limited ("the Association"), which accepts that it is a mere nominee for Harvard; like ANZ in relation to the Australian shares, the Association agrees to be bound by whatever decision the court makes in these proceedings .
The share certificates for the US shares were held in London by a bank to Harvard\'s order, and are now held at the liquidator\'s London offices .
The front of a typical US shares certificate states that the shares are transferable only on the books of the company upon surrender of the certificate .
However, the back of the certificate contains a blank transfer, signed on behalf of the Association, and stamped with the words that the Association "hereby guarantee that all necessary papers have been filed with the Registrar and/or transfer agents to ensure transfer" .
The Association has written to the liquidator confirming that, in light of this endorsement on the back of the certificates ("the back endorsement") the certificates "may be traded in the market without reference to [the Association and] the Association cannot identify the beneficial owner(s) of any of the shares".\r\n   The other documentation available in relation to the US shares is even more exiguous than in relation to the Australian shares .
Harvard would recommend to clients that Harvard should "retain the shares in "good marking names" held to the order of our nominee company" effectively for the reasons I have mentioned .
On occasion, Harvard wrote to clients "regarding your purchase of [certain US] shares" and stated that "in order to save on transaction costs these shares are being held to your order under a nominee name" .
Harvard similarly wrote to clients referring to the US shares as "your shares".\r\n   Harvard\'s internal records in relation to the US shares were very similar to that relating to the Australian shares.\r\n   I have seen two sets of "Standard Terms and Conditions" published by Harvard .
The first set was apparently in currency in September 1983 ("the 1983 terms") .
The second set ("the 1986 terms") were in currency in July 1986, and appear to have been printed on the reverse of at least some contract notes provided to clients .
Both sets of terms contained Condition 5 in the following terms:\r\n   "When you acquire securities we shall, if appropriate, apply for the registration thereof on your behalf and any document of title will be forwarded to you immediately upon its receipt provided that your account has been fully discharged .
In the case of certain overseas securities we may invite you to agree to accept registration of those securities in the name of our wholly owned subsidiary Harvard Securities Nominees Limited or in the name of a trust corporation or an authorised depository .
In the event of the registration costs of any security being excessive we reserve the right to recoup those costs from the Client. .
However, only the 1986 terms contained a choice of law clause, Clause 14, which provided as follows:\r\n   "These conditions in the contract shall be subject to and construed in accordance with the English law and any legal proceedings that may arise should be brought in the appropriate courts of England. .
In these proceedings, the liquidator seeks the determination of the court as to whether Harvard or the former clients of Harvard has the beneficial interest in the Australian shares and the US shares .
None of the former clients appear, although two of them, the respondents, have been appointed to represent them .
Harvard has sufficient US shares and Australian shares to account to all its former clients in respect of their beneficial interests (if any) in such shares.\r\n   THE CHOICE OF LAW In  Macmillan Inc  -v-  Bishops gate Investment Trust PLC  (No 3)  [1996] 1 WLR 387 , Staughton LJ said at 391H to 392B that, where there is no choice of law clause, one has to go through three stages in order to identify what he called "the applicable law" .
First, one must "characterise the issue that is before the court" .
Second, one must "select the rule of conflict of laws which lays down a connecting factor for the issue in question" .
Thirdly, one must "identify the system of law which is tied by the connecting factor found in stage two to the issue characterised in stage one".\r\n   So far as the first stage is concerned, I must consider both the legal ownership of the shares and the equitable ownership of the shares .
The law is clear in all three of the relevant jurisdictions in relation to legal ownership: where, as here, one is concerned with shares, which are registered as opposed to bearer, the legal owner of the shares is the person in whose name the shares are registered:   that is the position in English, Australian, and US law.\r\n   Accordingly, the relevant issue in the present case is whether the respondents have acquired and equitable interest in the Australian shares and/or the US shares.\r\n   As to the second stage, Staughton LJ said at 399F:\r\n   "The general rule, which is subject to exceptions, appears to me to be that issues as to rights of property are determined by the law of the place where the property is. .
He went on to say that "negotiable instruments... are assimilated to chattels, so that the lex situs applies" (see at 400B) .
At 405B he concluded that:\r\n   "An issue as to who has title to shares in a company should be decided by the law of the place where the shares are situated (lex situs) .
In the ordinary way, unless they are negotiable instruments by English law,... that is the law of the place where the company is incorporated .
There may be cases where it is arguably the law of the place where the share register is kept, but that problem does not arise today. .
At 411E, Auld LJ said:\r\n   "[T)here is authority and much to be said for treating issues of priority of ownership of shares in a corporation according to the lex situs of those shares .
That will normally be the country where the register is kept, usually but not always the country of incorporation .
If the shares are negotiable the lex situs will be where the pieces of paper constituting the negotiable instruments are at the time of the transfer. .
He concluded that this approach was not only supported by authority, but that it accorded with common sense and practicality.\r\n   Aldous LJ said at 424G-425A: "As a matter of principle I believe the appropriate law to decide questions of title to property, such as shares, is the lex situs, which is the same as the law of incorporation .
...The conclusion that the appropriate law is the law of incorporation is, I believe, also consistent with the general rule relating to movables and land... Further, the conclusion that it is the law of incorporation which should be used to decide questions of title, including questions as to priority of title, does, I believe, lead to certainty as opposed to applying the lex loci actus which can raise doubt as to what is the relevant transaction to be considered and where it takes place .
.. .
The conclusion is, I also believe, consistent with the trend of authority both in this country and abroad. .
I proceed on the assumption that each of the Australian and US companies maintained their share register respectively in Australia and the United States .
So far as the Australian shares are concerned, there is no question of their being negotiable .
Accordingly, (subject to there being any choice of law clause), in light of the observations I have quoted from  Macmillan,  it seems to me that the issue of the beneficial ownership of those shares is to be determined by Australian law: they are registered shares in a company registered in Australia and the share register is, I presume, in Australia .
Further, although probably irrelevant in light of  Macmillan,  the share certificates are physically in Australia.\r\n   The position with regard to the US shares is somewhat more complicated, because, in light of the back endorsement, it is necessary to decide whether they are negotiable instruments or not, in order to determine the applicable law .
In my judgment, the question of whether the US certificates are negotiable should be determined under English law: that is the lex fori, and, more importantly in light of the view of Staughton and Auld LJJ, it is the place in which the certificates art situated .
Once that is decided, it seems to me clear that-the equitable interest in the shares can be transferred even if legal title depends on registration: see  Re Rose  [1952] Ch 499  .
Accordingly, I conclude that the US shares are negotiable in equity, and, following the majority view in  Macmillan,  any question concerning equitable interests in the shares is governed by English law, subject again to any choice of law clause.\r\n   I turn then to the third stage, namely what Staughton LJ called "the connecting factor" .
At 392C, he said that the third stage was "in general... to be determined by the law of the place where the trial takes place (lex fori)".\r\n   In these circumstances, I conclude that the correct law to be applied to determine the beneficial interest in the shares subject to the present proceedings is (subject to any choice of law clause) Australian law in relation to the Australian shares and English law in relation to the US shares.\r\n   THE RELEVANT ENGLISH AUTHORITIES ON BENEFICIAL INTEREST In  Re Wait  [1927] 1 Ch .
606, Wait bought 1,000 tons of wheat ex  Challenger  under the main contract and, a day later, by a sub-contract, he sold 500 tons to sub-purchasers .
After the wheat had been shipped to its destination, the bill of lading for the 1,000 tons was forwarded to Wait and, the day before the purchase money was due from him, he received the sub-purchasers\' cheque due in respect of the sub-contract .
Wait paid this cheque into the bank and hypothecated the bill of loading .
He then went bankrupt .
Reversing the Divisional Court, the majority of the Court of Appeal held that the subpurchasers had no interest in any of the 1,000 tons, and were left to their remedy in damages.\r\n   The sub-purchasers relied on the Sale of Goods Act 1893 (whose successor plays no part in the present case) and also on more general equitable principles .
At 627, Atkin LJ said in relation to the sub-purchase contract that in his opinion \r\n   "a tender of documents of wheat of the contract description per motor vessel  Challenger  dated in accordance with the contract would be good tender however and from whosoever the sub-seller obtained the wheat" .
At 629-630 he said this:\r\n   "[N]o 500 tons of wheat have ever been earmarked, identified or appropriated as the wheat to be delivered to the claimants under the contract .
The claimants have never received any bill of loading, warrant, delivery order or any document of title representing the goods .
Nor can 500 tons or any less quantity be ascertained by subtracting from the bulk in the trustee\'s possession known quantities the property of the purchasers .
The trustee has in his possession in warehouse 530 tons of ... wheat .
It is not suggested that this is not an ordinary commercial commodity .
It is, however, said:  (a)  that the [sub-purchasers] are entitled to have the [sub contract] specifically performed... or  (b)  that the transactions between the parties have resulted in an equitable assignment to the [sub-purchasers] of either the whole bulk of 530 tons or at any rate of 500 tons of it, so as to entitle the [subpurchasers] to have 500 tons delivered to them; or to have a charge upon the bulk or 500 tons of it to secure the sum... which the [sub-purchasers] paid in advance .
.. .
I am of the opinion that the [subpurchasers] fail and that to grant the relief claimed would violate well established principles of common law and equity .
It would also appear to embarrass to a most serious degree the ordinary operations of buying and selling goods, and the banking operations which attend them. .
Atkin LJ then expanded his reasoning .
Having considered the sub-purchaser\'s claim under the 1893 Act, Atkin LJ at 634-635, turned to consider the argument that:\r\n   "There was in this case an equitable assignment to [the subpurchasers] of 500 tons of flour which entitled them to claim from the trustee delivery of 500 tons out of the 530 tons remaining in his possession, and, indeed, gave the [sub-purchasers] a charge or lien over the 1,000 tons to which [Wait] was entitled under his contract with [the original vendors] .
In the view that I have taken of the facts of this case, I have already said that the goods were never so ascertained that specific performance could have been ordered of them .
This consideration would appear to defeat the supposed equitable assignment.. .
I have already indicated my own view of the [sub contract] and suggested that [Wait] does not in fact agree to sell to [the sub-purchasers] any aliquot part of the 1,000 tons which in fact he had agreed to buy from [the vendors]. .
At 637-638, he went on to hold that the fact that the purchase money had been paid under the contract in advance of the due date made no difference, in his view, to the result.\r\n   Lord Hanworth MR also gave a judgment substantially agreeing with Atkin LJ .
At 632 he quoted with approval the observations of Lord Wensleydale in  Hoare  -v-  Dresser  7 HLC 290 at 324:\r\n   "I take it to be perfectly clear that in order to create an equitable assignment, the obligation must be to deliver a particular chattel, not to deliver any chattel. .
Sargant LJ reached the opposite conclusion, describing at 641 his disagreement with the majority as "complete and fundamental" .
He pointed out that if, under the sub-contract, Wait had agreed to sell the whole of the 1,000 tons the subject of the main contract, then, at least on his view as to the proper construction of the sub-contract (see towards the bottom of 641) the sub-purchaser would have had an equitable interest in the 1,000 tons .
He then said this:\r\n   "Is there then any real difference in the equitable position of the [sub-purchasers] because they agreed to buy not the whole 1,000 tons parcel but 500 tons or one half only of that parcel .
I think not.. .
It would be a fraud for [Wait] to sell or deal with the 1,000 tons in any manner that would prevent 500 tons part thereof be it left available to satisfy the claim of the [sub-purchasers]. .
I now turn to  Re London Wine Company (Shippers) Limited  [1986] PCC 121, a decision of Oliver J .
In that case, a company had substantial stocks of wine in a number of warehouses .
Most of these stocks had been sold to customers, who received from the company a "Certificate of Title" in respect of the wine for which they had paid, and each such certificate described the customer as "the sole and beneficial owner" of the wine in question .
There was no appropriation from the bulk of any wine to answer any particular contracts .
When receivers were appointed in respect of the company, it had sufficient stocks of wine to answer the claims of all of its customers .
Oliver J held that the company did not hold any of the wine in trust for its customers\', he further held that the customers had no proprietary right in respect of any of the wine, even though they had paid for the wine .
He reached this conclusions even where the customer had purchased the company\'s total stock of a particular wine .
At 137, mirroring similar observations of Atkin LJ in  Wait,  Oliver J said this at lines 23-40:\r\n   "I cannot see how, for instance, a farmer who declares himself to be a trustee of two sheep (without identifying them) can be said to have created a perfect and complete trust whatever rights he may confer by such declaration as a matter of contract .
And it would seem to me to be immaterial that at the time he has a flock of sheep out of which he could satisfy the interest .
Of course, he could by appropriate words, declare himself to be a trustee of the specified proportion of his whole flock and thus create an equitable tenancy in common between himself and the name beneficiary...  .
But the  mere  declaration that a given number of animals would be held upon trust could not... without very clear words pointing to such an intention, result in the creation of an interest... at the time of the declaration .
And where the mass from which the numerical interest is to take effect is not ascertainable at the date of the declaration such conclusion becomes impossible. .
At 142 line 45 to 143 line 3, Oliver said that the observation (of Sir John Romilly MR in  Pooley -v- Budd  (1851) 14 Beav 34) "that a trust was created of unascertained goods" could not "stand today in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Re Waif  .
He then went on to consider the judgments of Lord Hanworth MR and Atkin LJ in  Re Wait .
He emphasised that the goods in the case before him had not been ascertained any more than, at least in the view of the majority, the grain the subject of the sub-contract had been ascertained in  Wait:    see at 152 lines 1-24.\r\n   I note in passing that in  Re Stapylton Fletcher Limited  [1994] 1 WLR 1181, Jodge Paul Baker QC, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court, applied the reasoning of Oliver J in another case involving claims by customers of a wine company which had got into difficulties .
However, in relation to claims by some of the customers in that case, Judge Baker concluded that they had an equitable interest because, on the facts, the wine purchased by those customers had been kept separately or segregated from the company\'s other stock: in those circumstances, the subject matter of the alleged equitable interest had been sufficiently identified for the judge to conclude that an equitable interest did indeed exist.\r\n   I now turn to  Re Goldcorp Exchange Limited (in Receivership)  [1995] 1 AC 74 , a decision of the Privy Council allowing an appeal from the Court of Appeal in New Zealand .
In that case, the company, which dealt in bullion, sold to its customers bullion, which it stored for them .
Each customer received an invoice certificate verifying his ownership, and had the right to require physical delivery to his order on seven days notice and payment of delivery charges .
Although the company assured customers that it would maintain sufficient stock of bullion to meet all their demands, it failed to do so .
The question which fell to be considered was whether or not the customers had any interests in the bullion owned and stored by the company.\r\n   In giving the judgment of the Privy Council, Lord Mustill began at 89G-90A with the following observations:\r\n   "It is common ground that the contracts in question were for the sale of unascertained goods .
For present purposes, two species of unascertained goods may be distinguished .
First there are "generic goods" .
These are sold on terms which preserve the seller\'s freedom to decide for himself how and from what source he would obtain goods answering the contractual description .
Secondly, there are "goods sold ex-bulk" .
By this expression their Lordships denote goods which are by express stipulation to be supplied from a fixed and pre determined source, from within which the seller may make his own choice...  .
Approaching these situations a priori common sense dictates that the buyer cannot acquire title until it is known to what goods the title relates .
Whether the property then passes will depend upon the intention of the parties and in particular on whether there has been a consequential appropriation of particular goods to the contract .
...Their Lordships have laboured this point, about which there has been no dispute, simply to show that any attempt by the non-allocated claimant to asset the legal title passed by virtue of the sale would have been defeated not by some added legal technicality but by what Lord Blackburne called "the very nature of things" .
The same conclusions applies, and for the same reason, to any argument that a title in equity was created by the sale, taken in isolation from the collateral promises. .
Having explained that it was strictly unnecessary to consider  Re Wait,  because that case involved a contract for a sale ex-bulk, Lord Mustill (at 9IB) suggested that the reasoning in the whole of the judgment of Atkin LJ was "irresistible".\r\n   In those circumstances, he turned "to consider whether there is anything in the collateral promises which enables the customers to overcome the practical objections to an immediate transfer of title" (at 9ID), and said this:\r\n   "The question then immediately arises - what was the subject matter of the trust .
The only possible answer, so far as concerns an immediate transfer of title on sale, is that the trust related to the company\'s current stock of bullion answering the contractual description; for there was no other bullion to which the trust could relate.. .
The company cannot have intended to create an interest in its general stock of gold which would have inhibited any dealings with it otherwise and for the purpose of delivery under the non-allocated sale contract .
Conversely the customer, who is presumed to have intended that somewhere in the bullion held by or on behalf of the company there would be stored a quantity representing "his" bullion, cannot have contemplated that its rights would be fixed by reference to a combination of the quantity of bullion that the relevant description which the company happened to have in stock at the relevant time and the number of purchasers who happened to have opened contracts at that time for the goods of that description .
.. .Nor is the argument improved by reshaping the trust, so as to contemplate that the property in the res vendita did pass to the customer, albeit in the absence of delivery, and then merged in a general equitable title to the pooled stock of bullion .
Once again the argument contradicts the transaction .
The customer purchased for the physical delivery on demand of the precise quantity of bullion fixed by his contract, not a shifting proportion of the shifting bulk, prior to delivery. .
(91D-H) .
Lord Mustill went on to consider a number of other arguments raised on behalf of the customers, all of which he rejected and many of which, in his view, ran into the same sort of problems discussed in the passage I have quoted.\r\n   In the result, the Privy Council rejected the contention on behalf of the customers that they had any equitable interest in the bullion .
At 100A-B, Lord Mustill referred to the judgment in  London Wine  and said:\r\n   "The facts of that case were not precisely the same as the present, and the arguments on the present appeal have been more far-reaching than with there deployed .
Nevertheless their Lordships are greatly fortified in their opinion by the close analysis of the authorities and principles by Oliver J, and in other circumstances their Lordships would have been content to do little more than summarise it and express their entire agreement. .
The final authority to which I must refer on this aspect in  Hunter  -v-  Moss  [1994] 1 WLR 452 , which was argued and decided after argument had been concluded, but before the decision had been given, in  Goldcorp .
The defendant was the registered holder of 950 shares in a company with an issued share capital of 1,000 shares .
In the course of a conversation, the defendant agreed "that he would henceforth hold five percent, of the [issued shares in the company] either for, or in trust for, the plaintiff" (see at 456D) .
The main question before the Court of Appeal was whether the judge was right to conclude that in the circumstances the defendant held 50 of his 950 shares on trust for the plaintiff .
Dillon LJ (with whom Mann and Hirst LJJ agreed) said that more was a valid oral declaration of trust .
At 457H he observed:\r\n   "It is plain that a bequest by the defendant to the plaintiff of 50 of his ordinary shares... would be a valid bequest on the defendant\'s death which his executors or administrators will be bound to carry into effect. .
At 458B he went on to say:\r\n   "It seems to me... that if a person holds, say, 200 ordinary shares in ICI and he executes a transfer of 50 ordinary shares in ICI either to an individual donee or to trustees, and hands over the certificate for his 200 shares and the transfer to the transferees or to brokers to give effect to the transfer, there is a valid gift to the individual or trustees/transferees of the 50 shares without any further identification of their numbers .
It will be a completed gift without waiting for registration of the transfer: see in  Re Rose  [1952] Ch 499  .
In the ordinary way a new certificate would be issued for the 50 shares to the transferee and the transferrer would receive a balance certificate in respect of the rest of his holding .
I see no uncertainty at all in those circumstances. .
Dillon LJ then referred to  London Wine,  and having summarised the facts, he said this at 458H:\r\n   "It seems to me that that case is a long way from the present .
It is concerned with the appropriation of chattels and when the property in chattels passes .
We are concerned with a declaration of trust, accepting that the legal title remained in the defendant and was not intended, at the time the trust was declared, to pass immediately to the plaintiff .
The defendant was to retain the shares as trustee for the plaintiff. .
In those circumstances, in agreement with the judge in the first instance, the Court of Appeal held that there was an effective declaration of trust.\r\n   After the decision in  Goldcorp  had been given, the House of Lords refused the defendant in  Hunter  leave to appeal:   see at [1994] 1 WLR 614.\r\n   CONCLUSIONS ON BENEFICIAL INTERESTS IN ENGLISH LAW On behalf of the liquidator, Mr Halpern, to whose argument I am much indebted, suggests that I should hold that the former clients of Harvard have no beneficial interest in the shares in English law, in light of the decision and reasoning in  Wait, London Wine, and Goldcorp .
So far as  Hunter  is concerned, he submits that I should either refuse to follow it or distinguish it.\r\n   Should I refuse to follow  Hunter  .
At page 61 of the current, Fifteenth, Edition of Underhill and Hayton "Law of Trusts and Trustees" there is strong adverse criticism of the decision and reasoning in  Hunter .
It is said that Dillon LJ\'s reliance on the analogy of testamentary dispositions was inappropriate, because:\r\n   "On death a testator is totally divested of all his  legal and beneficial title in all his assets in favour of his executor who becomes subject to equitable obligations to effect the testator\'s wishes so far as practicable...  .
In his lifetime a settlor is only divested in his benefit or entitlement to his assets where one knows to which assets such divestments relates. .
In addition, as Mr Halpern points out, the reliance by Dillon LJ on the decision in  Re Rose  appears to overlook the fact that, in the relevant document, Mr Rose had specifically identified the shares which were intended to be the subject matter of the gift (see towards the bottom of page 500) .
Underhill and Hay ton conclude their discussion as follows:\r\n   "In view of the weak reasoning in  Hunter  -v-  Moss  and of the ringing endorsement in  Re London Wine Shippers Limited  by the Privy Council in  Re Goldcorp Exchange Limited .
.. it is respectfully submitted that  Hunter -v-Moss  should not be followed: there is no sound reasoning for distinguishing trusts of goods from trusts of intangibles. .
I see the force of these points .
However, the decision in  Hunter  is binding on me, unless I am satisfied that it is  per incuriam  or that it has been overruled by a subsequent decision.\r\n   As to  Hunter  being per incuriam, Mr Halpern argues that it is inconsistent with the reasoning in  London Wine  and  Wait .
London Wine  is a decision of a lower court, and in any event it was expressly considered and distinguished by the Court of Appeal in  Hunter .
On the other hand,  Wait  was also a decision of the Court of Appeal, and was not expressly referred to, let alone distinguished, by the Court of Appeal in  Hunter .
Nonetheless, I do not think that it is properly open to me to hold that the decisions in  Wait  and  Hunter  are inconsistent and that I can choose between them or to conclude that, had the Court of Appeal in  Hunter  properly considered the decision in  Wait,  they would have reached a different conclusion .
First, it is clear that the decision in  Wait  was cited to the Court of Appeal in  Hunter  (see at 453 A/B): I must therefore presume that it was considered by them .
Secondly, in view of the way in which Dillon LJ distinguished  London Wine,  it seems to me that he was impliedly distinguishing, or would have distinguished,  Wait  in the same way.\r\n   Equally, I do not consider that I can hold that  Hunter  is not binding on the basis that it has been effectively overruled by  Goldcorp .
First, it appears to me that while the decision in  Hunter  is undoubtedly binding on me in principle, the decision in  Goldcorp,  being that of the Privy Council and not of the House of Lords, is not binding on me, and would not have been binding on the Court of Appeal in  Hunter .
Secondly, I refer again to the way in which Dillon LJ distinguished  London Wine:  he said it was "concerned with the appropriation of chattels and when the property in chattels passes", whereas in  Hunter  the Court of Appeal was concerned with shares and a declaration of trust .
In my judgment, therefore, the ground upon which the Court of Appeal in  Hunter  distinguished  London Wine  is substantially the same ground upon which  Goldcorp  can be distinguished from  Hunter .
Mr Halpern\'s alternative argument was that  Hunter  could be properly distinguished from  Wait, London Wine  and  Goldcorp  on a ground on which the present case could be properly distinguished from  Hunter,  namely that  Hunter  was concerned with an express declaration of trust, whereas the other cases (including the present one) are not .
While it is true that this is a point mentioned by Dillon LJ when distinguishing  London Wine  (see at 458H) I have come to the conclusion that it is not a proper ground for distinguishing  Hunter  from  Wait, London Wine  and, indeed,  Goldcorp  and the present case .
First, it is clear from the reasoning in  Wait  and  London Wine  that this is not a valid ground for distinction .
The point is well illustrated by Oliver J\'s inability to see how "a farmer who declares himself to be trustee of two sheep (without identifying them) can be said to have created a perfect and complete trust of whatever rights he may confer by such declaration as a matter of contract" and from his disagreement with Sir John Romilly .
Secondly, it appears to me that the suggested ground for distinguishing  Hunter  runs into difficulties in light of the passage I have quoted from the judgment of Dillon LJ in that case at 458B: as part of the reasoning for rejecting the defendant\'s argument, he said in terms that the execution of a document, by way of gift, of some of the proposed donors shares (with no identification as to precisely which shares) would nonetheless be sufficient to create an enforceable trust .
Thirdly, in my view the suggested distinction between  Hunter,  on the one hand, and  Wait  and  London Wine  (and indeed  Goldcorp)  on the other hand is not logically defensible, a view clearly consistent with the general thrust of the observations to which I have referred in Underhill and Hay ton, and in Meagher Gummow & Lehane, referred to below.\r\n   Furthermore, in  Hunter  itself, the judge did not decide that an express declaration of trust, in terms, was made .
He merely concluded that "the sense of what [the defendant] then said was that he would henceforth hold the shares on such a trust" (see at 457E) .
(Indeed in the present case, I have already quoted from correspondence from Harvard to its clients in which Harvard described the holding of Australian and US shares, sold to the relevant client, as being held "on your behalf" and "being your shares").\r\n   While I am not particularly convinced by the distinction, it appears to me that a more satisfactory way of distinguishing  Hunter  from the other cases is that it was concerned with shares, and not with chattels .
First, that is a ground which is consistent with Dillon LJ\'s reliance on  Re Rose  (a case concerned with shares) and his ground for distinguishing  London Wine  (and, by implication,  Wait)  which, it will be remembered, he described as being "concerned with the appropriation of  chattels  and when  property in chattels  passes" .
Secondly, it is on this basis that the editors of Underhill and Hayton believe that  Hunter  is explained (although they regard it on an unsatisfactory basis) .
Thirdly, the observations of Atkin LJ in  Wait  at 630 referring to the "ordinary operations of buying and selling goods" could be said to provide a policy ground for there being one rule for chattels and another for shares.\r\n   Fourthly, as the editors of Meagher Gummow & Lehane on "Equity Doctrines & Remedies" (Third Edition) point out, the need for appropriation before any equitable interest can exist in relation to chattels can be contrasted with the absence of any such need before there can be an effective equitable assignment of an unascertained part of a whole debt or fund (see at paragraphs 679 to 682) .
This distinction is described by the editors as "very difficult to see"; nonetheless, they accept that, despite the criticism to which cases such as  Wait  have been subjected, it is unlikely that they will be overruled .
The editors conclude:\r\n   "What must be appreciated, despite what has sometimes been said in reliance on the judgment of Atkin LJ..., is the narrow scope of the principle for which those cases stand: it applies only to contracts for the sale of an unascertained part of a mass of goods .
So limited, the principle may still be regarded as anomalous but, perhaps, commercially convenient: see  Re Wait  at 636, 639, 640 per Atkin LJ. .
The description of the sub-contracted grain in  Wait,  the client\'s wine in  London Wine, and  the customer\'s bullion in  Goldcorp  as "an unascertained part of a mass of goods" is quite apt .
It would not, however, be a sensible description of the 50 shares in  Hunter  or, indeed, the shares in the present case .
Mr Halpern pointed out that it is not really possible to identify, whether physically or by words, a proportion of a debt, whereas it is possible to identify chattels (by labelling or segregation) or shares (by reference to their number); he also pointed out that part of a debt or fund is fungible with the balance .
For those two reasons, he submitted that the inconsistency suggested in Meagher Gummow & Lehane is not valid .
There is obvious force in that point, but, in the end, it seems to me that, given that the distinction exists between an assignment of part of a holding of chattels and an assignment of part of a debt or fund, the effect of the decision in  Hunter  is that, in this context, shares fall to be treated in this context in the same way as a debt or fund rather than chattels.\r\n   In all the circumstances, therefore, it seems to me that the correct way for me, at first instance, to explain the difference between the result in  Hunter,  and that in  Wait, London Wine  and  Goldcorp,  is on the ground that  Hunter  was concerned with shares, as opposed to chattels.\r\n   To my mind, the provisions of Clause 5 and the correspondence and other documentation to which I have referred show that, as between Harvard and its former clients, a particular number of unidentified shares of a particular class in a particular company were being treated as the beneficial property of the client .
Had the correspondence and internal records of Harvard gone one stage further, and identified the share numbers the subject of this arrangement, Mr Halpern accepts (quite rightly in my judgment) that the beneficial interest in the relevant shares would have been vested in the client .
The only reason for contending that this is not the case is that the precise shares were not identified .
In light of the decision and reasoning in  Hunter,  and the above discussion, I do not consider that it is open to me to hold that that aspect prevents Harvard\'s former clients having a beneficial interest in the shares, so far as English law is concerned.\r\n   BENEFICIAL INTERESTS:   AUSTRALIAN LAW I have the benefit of a detailed report from Australian lawyers, Mallesons Stephen Jaques ("Mallesons") which concludes that, on the facts I have recited, Harvard\'s former clients would not, under Australian law, have an equitable interest in any of the Australian shares held by Harvard .
The report sets out facts accurately, and considers all the authorities to which I have referred on this issue, and also an Australian authority relating to shares where the point was deliberately left open  {Herdegen -v- Federal Commissioner of Taxation  (1988) 84 ALR 271 at 279 per Gummow J) .
Having considered  Wait  .-.nd the observations in Meagher Gummow & Lehane, Mallesons say:\r\n   "We do not regard the subsequent English decisions  of Hunter...  as having resolved this uncertainty in so far as the laws of [Australia] are concerned. .
They go on to say that:\r\n   "[I]n our opinion it is necessary under the laws of [Australia] to establish certainty of subject matter in relation to a trust or equitable assignment to securities by identifying or allocating them .
Accordingly, in our opinion any purported sale of the securities by Harvard to clients was ineffective to pass any equitable interest to them immediately upon the sale .
There was no sufficient identification or allocation of the securities the subject of any purported sale. .
In those circumstances, Mallesons conclude that:\r\n   "In our view it is likely that courts of [Australia] would hold that Harvard\'s former clients hold only contractual rig]is against Harvard and hold no equitable interest in the relevant securities held by [ANZ]. .
Mallesons have correctly understood the facts, and have considered the problem fully and carefully .
The conclusion they have reached is clearly consistent with the trenchant view expressed in one leading English textbook, namely Underbill & Hayton .
It represents a slight extension of a principle which is accepted, albeit reluctantly, in the leading Australian equity textbook, namely Meagher Gummow & Lehane .
There is no suggestion in any decision of an Australian court, any textbook, or any other document that I have seen, which calls into question their conclusion.\r\n   Many principles of Australian law and English law are identical; many are very similar .
However, in the present case, I conclude that, on the evidence and arguments before me, Australian law produces a different result from English law.\r\n   ESTOPPEL It is right to mention an alternative way in which Mr Halpern has suggested that the respondents might be able to put their case, namely estoppel .
In effect the respondents\' argument would be that the correspondence to which I have referred gives rise to an unequivocal representation on the part of Harvard to the effect that the shares which it says it holds on behalf of a particular client are indeed held for that client, and therefore Harvard is estopped from denying that the client does not have a proprietary interest in the shares .
This is similar to an argument raised in  London Wine  (see at 157 line 14 and onwards) .
In that case, Oliver J held that any estoppel argument could not succeed against the receivers of the company, because it could not confer any proprietary interest in favour of the customers which was binding on the receivers .
However, at the top of 159, he emphasised that the position might be different if, instead of the legal ownership being vested in a company in receivership, it was vested in an individual who had become bankrupt .
A similar point is made by Lord Mustill in  Goldcorp  at 94E-G .
Accordingly, the possibility of such an estoppel argument succeeding against a liquidator, as opposed to receivers, of a company, has been left open.\r\n   However, I do not consider that such an argument could succeed against the liquidator in the present case if the argument based on beneficial interest failed .
If the respondents have no beneficial interest in the shares, then, by definition, and because of the very reason why there can be no equitable interest, any estoppel which could be invoked by them against Harvard could only be an estcopel in personam .
In my judgment, it is not open to a person, who relies on such an estoppel, to contend that it gives a proprietary right, as opposed to a right to prove, against the company once it is in liquidation .
To hold otherwise would involve concluding that, in advance of its going into liquidation, a company could do or say something with regard to a third party which enabled the third party (without claiming a proprietary interest) to obtain priority over other unsecured creditors in the liquidation .
In  Re Sharpe (a Bankrupt)  [1980] 1 WLR 219 at 224E-F, Browne-Wilkinson J, having concluded at 223 D/E that the right of the claimant was "one akin to or an extension of a proprietary estoppel" which gave rise to a proprietary interest, said:\r\n   "In general the trustee in bankruptcy steps into the shoes of the debtor and takes the debtor\'s property subject to all rights and equities affecting it...  .
However the trustee in bankruptcy is free to break any merely contractual obligation of the debtor, leaving the other party to his remedy in damages, which damages will only give rise to a right to prove in the bankruptcy. .
In this case, any estoppel which existed would not amount to a proprietary interest, but would have given rise to a personal claim against Harvard.\r\n   I believe that my conclusion is consistent with the reasoning of Harman J in  Re Exchange Securities & Commodities Limited (in liquidation)  [1988] Ch .
46: see especially at 57B-60A .
I would also refer to  British Eagle International Airlines Limited  -v-  Companie Nationale Air France  [1975] 1 WLR 758, where the House of Lords held by a majority that it was not open to parties to contract out of the provisions of Section 302 of the Companies Act 1948 which provided that, subject to preferential payments, the property of a company should, on winding up, be applied to pari passu .
Logic would suggest that the same reasoning must apply to an estoppel claim as to a contractual one.\r\n   CONCLUSIONS ON BENEFICIAL INTERESTS The US shares In light of the decision and reasoning of the Court of Appeal in  Hunter,  I conclude that Harvard\'s former clients acquired the beneficial interest in the US shares which were sold to them, and held on their behalf by Harvard, and that those equitable interests are binding on the liquidators.\r\n   The Australian shares I have already referred to the fact that at some point Harvard\'s standard terms and conditions were amended to include Clause 14: It would appear that this was some time between 1983 and 1986 .
It seems to me that, where Australian shares were acquired by Harvard for clients at a time when standard terms and conditions communicated to the clients included Clause 14, English law and not Australian law would apply: that is the effect of Clause 14 .
In those cases, the same conclusion would apply as in relation to the US shares: the former clients would have the beneficial interest in the shares which had been sold to them and held on their behalf, in the same way as the US shares.\r\n   Where Clause 14 does not apply, there would have been no choice of law provision, and for the reasons given above, Australian law would apply .
In such cases, I conclude that Australian shares, even though sold to, and held on behalf of, former clients of Harvard, are beneficially owned by Harvard.\r\n   When does Clause 14 apply .
In these circumstances, the liquidator needs to know whether Australian shares acquired for clients were acquired in circumstances where the 1986 terms applied (in which case English law would apply and former clients would have a beneficial interest) or whether the 1983 terms, or indeed no standard terms, applied (in which case the issue would have to be determined by reference to Australian law, and such beneficial interest would arise).\r\n   In principle, the matter appears to me to stand thus .
In the absence of a choice of law clause, Australian law would apply .
The onus is therefore on the person who seeks to contend that there is an applicable choice of law clause .
That person would be the former client .
On the present state of the evidence, one would have to consider whether a former client has established that the 1986 terms (being the only conditions that have been produced with any choice of law clause) applied to a particular parcel of Australian shares .
As I see it, in order to do that, a respondent would have to show either that the 1986 terms were communicated to him on or with his contract note (as has been shown in one instance before me) or that the 1986 terms had been provided to him, as Harvard\'s Standard Terms, prior to the contract note in question.\r\n   It seems to me that the liquidator is entitled to proceed on the basis that all Australian shares acquired on or after 14th July 1986 (being the date upon which the contract note, whose reverse side contains the 1986 terms) similarly contained the 1986 terms on the reverse, and that, therefore, such Australian shares were sold to former clients on terms which included Clause 14, and are therefore governed by English law.\r\n   By similar reasoning, given that the 1983 terms were received by another former client of Harvard, namely the second respondent, on 20th September 1983, it seems to me that the liquidator can proceed on the basis that all Australian shares held by Harvard and sold to clients before 20th September 1983 were subject to no choice of law clause, and therefore are governed by Australian law.\r\n   The more difficult question relates to the period between 20th September 1983 and 14 July 1986 .
Bearing in mind where the onus of proof lies, and given that there is simply no evidence to show when, between those two dates, Harvard\'s standard terms changed, it appears to me that, in respect of this period, the liquidator should proceed on the assumption that the 1986 terms did not apply until 14th July 1986 .
I appreciate that it is somewhat artificial to conclude that the liquidator should proceed on the basis that the first date upon which the 1986 terms should be treated as applying is the first date upon which there is evidence that they were communicated to any client of Harvard, but I cannot see any other logical or ascertainable date to choose.\r\n   PROCEDURE AND CONCLUSIONS Procedure It is not necessary for me to give any directions in relation to Australian shares in which former clients of Harvard have no beneficial interest .
The liquidator will deal with them as assets of Harvard .
However, in relation to the US shares, and those Australian shares in which the former clients of Harvard have the beneficial interest, the position is a little more complicated .
In the absence of any special circumstances, the appropriate course would be for the liquidator to cause any such shares to be transferred to the relevant client and registered in his name .
However, as recent correspondence which I have seen demonstrates, and as indeed is borne out by Harvard\'s reasons for holding the Australian shares in the name of ANZ and the US shares in the name of the Association, this would be a potentially expensive exercise .
It would also seem to be a course which would not benefit the former clients of Harvard: the price per share which they would each receive on the sale of their comparatively small holdings would be significantly less than the price per share which could be obtained if each block currently held on behalf of Harvard were sold as a whole .
An argument is already developing between the liquidator and representatives of former clients of Harvard as to who should pay the cost of transferring the individual shareholdings to former clients and of registering those transfers.\r\n   In these circumstances, it seems to me that the sensible course to take is that suggested by Mr Halpern, namely to direct that the liquidator can sell the US shares and those Australian shares in which former clients of Harvard have a beneficial interest, and that he should then account to each former client out of the proceeds of sale of the relevant block of shares pro rata to that former client\'s holding .
For the avoidance of doubt, I should add that, before accounting to such former clients, the liquidator would be entitled to deduct from the gross sum received for the shares any reasonable charges and expenses which he incurs in effecting such disposals.\r\n   Conclusions In these circumstances, I conclude as follows:\r\n   1 .
The main issue is whether former clients of Harvard have the beneficial interest in certain US shares and certain Australian shares sold to them, and held for them, by Harvard; 2 .
In relation to the US shares, the proper law for determining that issue is English law; 3 .
In relation to the Australian shares, the proper law for determining that issue is Australian law in respect of shares sold to former clients before 14th July 1986, and English law in respect of shares so sold on or after that date; 4 .
Under English law, in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Hunter,  by which I am bound, the US shares and the Australian shares sold to former clients after 14th July 1986, are held beneficially for Harvard\'s former clients; 5 .
In relation to Australian shares acquired before 14th July 1986, former clients have no such beneficial interest; 6 .
In relation to those shares in which former clients have a beneficial interest, the liquidator is at liberty to sell the shares and to account to the former clients out of the net proceeds of sale pro rata to their respective interests.  .
b'This action is by way of sequel to  Insurance Corporation of the Channel Islands Ltd. and Another v. McHugh and Royal Hotel Ltd.  [1997] Ll.R.L.R .
94, in which I gave judgment on 5th July 1996 .
As my previous judgment records, the second defendant ("Royal Hotel") owns the Royal Hotel, a landmark on the water-front at St. Peter Port in Guernsey .
The hotel has been closed since June 1992 as a result of a series of fires .
Royal Hotel was insured against fire, among other perils, by two annual policies which were renewed in October 1991 with the first plaintiffs ("ICCI") and were effective from 30th November 1991 .
The first policy No .
G0330.ll covered material damage to the buildings .
The second No .
G0331.ll had four operative sections, of which the business interruption section is most material .
The first plaintiff ("Royal Insurance") is the parent company of ICCI .
It reinsured ICCI up to \xc2\xa33.7 million in excess of \xc2\xa3300,000 each fire loss .
In addition, by a document dated 11th July 1986 described as an indemnity, it consented to its name being substituted, if required, in insurances issued by ICCI .
Each policy was endorsed with an assignment of the benefit of this indemnity to Royal Hotel .
Royal Hotel invoked this benefit in respect of the fires at the hotel .
In the previous action, I considered claims by ICCI and Royal Insurance and counterclaims by Royal Hotel arising out of the fires and the conduct of the potential claims to which they gave rise .
I held that Royal Hotel had forfeited all benefit under the business interruption policy and was obliged to repay the \xc2\xa3950,000 received under that policy on account of claims arising out of the fires of June 1992 .
The basis was that, following the fires, Mr McHugh on behalf of Royal Hotel had on a number of occasions used fraudulent means or devices to promote Royal Hotel\'s position and to obtain benefits under the business interruption policy, and that condition 5 of that policy provided for forfeiture of all such benefit in such circumstances .
The counterclaims were for alleged conspiracy and/or breach of contract in relation to both the business interruption and the material damage policies .
I dismissed them, with the limited exception that I held that ICCI was as from 31st December 1992 in breach of a contract whereby it had agreed to pay Royal Hotel an interim payment of \xc2\xa31,000,000 in respect of the material damage policy .
I ordered damages to be assessed in respect of that breach .
Fundamental to my conclusion that Mr McHugh used fraudulent means or devices following the fires were certain findings which I made (in the report at pages 103-6) regarding the position prior to the fires .
The relevant findings can be summarized as follows: (1)        In or about June 1991 Mr McHugh had instructed Mr Anquetil, an accounts clerk with Consolidator Ltd., Royal Hotel\'s parent company, to create invoices in Royal Hotel\'s name made out to Consolidator which were to show accommodation (at the hotel) let to Consolidator in July, August and September 1991, in the knowledge (on the part of Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil) that no such accommodation had in fact been let to Consolidator .
(2)        Mr McHugh\'s purpose and intention in giving the instruction was to manipulate Royal Hotel\'s monthly and annual occupancy figures, trading turnover and profits for its 1991/1992 financial year so as to create a more favourable picture of its trading performance if and when it became either necessary or desirable to show management or audited annual accounts to one or other of Royal Hotel\'s bankers, Republic National Bank of New York (Guernsey)("RNB") and TSB Bank (Channel Islands)("TSB") Limited .
[The word "audited" follows from my previous judgment. .
(3)        In compliance with Mr McHugh\'s instructions, and as Mr McHugh knew and intended, in or about September 1991 Mr Anquetil produced three invoices in the name of Royal Hotel made out to Consolidator apparently showing accommodation at the hotel let to Consolidator for the months of July, August and September 1991, although, as Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil each knew, no such accommodation as was shown in the invoices had been let to Consolidator .
(4)        The actual effect of these invoices was to increase apparent room turnover and percentage occupancy for the three months affected from \xc2\xa323,488 (32%), \xc2\xa334,503 (35%) and \xc2\xa333,024 (35%) respectively to \xc2\xa374,508 (85%), \xc2\xa380,913 (84%) and 79%) respectively, and to increase total turnover from \xc2\xa391,907, \xc2\xa3154,266 and \xc2\xa393,029 respectively to \xc2\xa3142,927, \xc2\xa3148,769 and \xc2\xa3141,344 respectively .
Whilst Mr McHugh could not have known the figures mentioned in (4) in June 1991 and may well not have known the precise effect of the invoices at any presently material time, there can be no doubt, in the light of my previous judgment, that - (5) Mr McHugh must have known and intended that the invoices would increase, and after their creation that they had increased, apparent turnover and occupancy in a way which would and did paint a significantly more favourable picture of Royal Hotel\'s performance than would be or had in fact been achieved .
As my previous judgment recounts, a similar course of events repeated itself when Mr McHugh instructed Mr Anquetil in or about March/April 1992 to address further invoices to BCS (another company controlled by Mr Slater whose family trust owns Consolidator) and when such invoices were in June 1992 created for the months March, April and May 1992 .
In the present action the focus is on Mr McHugh\'s creation of the Consolidator invoices with the purpose and intention stated in (2) and (5) above .
The Consolidator invoices were both instructed and created prior to the renewal in October 1991 of Royal Hotel\'s insurances .
Following my judgment on 5th July 1996, Herbert Smith by letter dated 12th August 1996 wrote announcing that ICCI and Royal Hotel had decided to avoid the material damage policy and enclosing draft points of claim identifying as the grounds non-disclosure of the matters summarized in paragraphs (1) to (5) above .
The present action raises issues of (A) materiality, (B) inducement, (C) affirmation and (D) cause of action or issue estoppel and/or abuse of process .
I take these in turn .
(A) MATERIALITY It  is clear that the knowledge and intentions of Mr McHugh as a director and company secretary of Royal Hotel regarding the matters summarized in (1) to (5) are attributable to the Royal Hotel, and that ICCI and Royal Insurance were unaware of the matters when the material damage insurance was renewed in October 1991 .
Miss Bucknall Q.C .
for Royal Hotel was content to refer to such matters by the shorthand of dishonest conduct .
But she emphasized - and I proceed on the basis - that (a) no criminal act had been established (or even suggested until the plaintiff\'s skeleton) and (b) no actual use of the invoices had been made in relation to any bank before renewal of the insurance .
The false invoices were simply prepared for use in relation to banks if and when that should become necessary or desirable .
The issue is whether the matters were material to be known to a prudent insurer in ICCI\'s position upon the renewal of insurance .
The onus of establishing this is on ICCI and Royal Insurance .
They adduced evidence from Mr Jack Smith, a former underwriter and later manager with the Commercial Union, who was cross-examined by Miss Bucknall .
No expert evidence was adduced by Royal Hotel .
The House of Lords in  Pan Atlantic Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Pine Top Insurance Co. Ltd.  [1995] 1 A.C. 501 held that a circumstance may be material "even though a full and accurate disclosure of it would not in itself have had a decisive effect on the prudent underwriter\'s decision whether to accept the risk and if so at what premium" (per Lord Mustill at p.550C) .
As explained by the Court of Appeal in  St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co. v. McConnell Powell Constructors Ltd.  [1995] 2 Ll .
R. 116, Lord Mustill, with Lord Goffs effective endorsement, further defined the duty of materiality as extending to "all matters which would have been taken into account by the underwriter when assessing the risk (i.e .
the "speculation") which he was consenting to assume. .
(per Lord Mustill at p.538C-D) In  St. Paul  at p. 124 the Court of Appeal also interpreted this definition as no different from, and to that extent as expressly approving, part of Steyn LJ\'s formulation in the Court of Appeal in  Pan Atlantic  at [1993] 1 Ll.R .
496, 506, viz .
that ".... avoidance for non-disclosure is the remedy provided by law because the risk presented is different from the true risk .
But for the non-disclosure the prudent underwriter would have appreciated that it was a different ... .
risk. .
It is important to realize what is embraced by "risk" .
It is not simply the peril or possibility of loss or damage occurring within the scope of the policy .
It embraces other matters which would, if known, be likely to influence a prudent underwriter\'s decision .
It includes what is known as "moral hazard", which may merely increase the likelihood of it being made  to  appear (falsely) that loss or damage has occurred falling within the scope of the policy: see per Lord Mustill in  Pan Atlantic  at pp .
534D-E and 538E-F .
There is ample authority regarding the potential materiality of "moral hazard" .
In  Locker and Woolf Ltd. v. Western Australian Insurance Co.  [1936] 1 K.B .
408, Slesser L.J .
said that it was "elementary" that it was one of the matters to be considered by an insurance company, and that in the case before him ".... it is quite impossible to say that the non-disclosure by those proposing to take out a policy against fire risks that they have had an insurance on motors declined on the ground of untrue answers in the proposal form is not the non-disclosure of a fact very material for the insurance company to know - a fact which if known to the company might lead them to take the view that the proposers were undesirable persons with whom to have contractual relations. .
May J. referred to this authority in  March Cabaret Club & Casino Ltd. v. The London Assurance  [1975] 1 Ll.R .
169, 176, He said that there was no objection in law to a conclusion that the duty of disclosure extended to require disclosure of the actual commission of an offence of which the proposer had not yet been convicted or had even been acquitted .
At page 177(1) he distinguished between the practical expectations which an underwriter might have about the likelihood of such disclosure being made, and the legal duty to make it .
In  The "Dora"  [1989] 1 Ll.R .
69 Phillips J. concluded on the evidence that (well-founded) pending charges of smuggling and the skipper\'s criminal record each created a material moral hazard .
Finally, in  Gate v. Sun Alliance Insurance Ltd.  [1995] Ll.R.L.R .
385 (High Court of New Zealand), 407, Fisher J. held that incidents of prior dishonesty by a proposer were capable of being material (in particular, as going to the risk of a false claim), whether or not they had been detected or had led to conviction .
It was a question of fact and degree and so of expert evidence whether any particular act of dishonesty was one which a prudent underwriter would take into account when assessing the risk .
I respectfully agree with all these statements of legal principle .
The further question whether a proposer is obliged to disclose a still pending charge or allegation, of which he has not been convicted and is  in fact  innocent, is one on which the authorities differ .
May J. in  March Cabaret  followed by Phillips J. in  The "Dora"  held that this too depends on the expert evidence .
Forbes J. in  Reynolds v. Phoenix Assurance Co. Ltd.  [1978] 2 Ll.R .
440, 460 and Fisher J. in  Gate  reached an opposite conclusion .
The question does not arise in this case, where the critical conduct is established (and now indeed admitted) to be a matter of fact .
The question is therefore whether ICCI and Royal Insurance have proved that Royal Hotel\'s conduct through Mr McHugh was material to be known to a prudent underwriter when agreeing to renew the present material damage insurance .
The insurance was subject to a long-term (five-year) agreement commencing 30th November 1988 .
Under this, in return for a 7.5 % discount on premiums, Royal Hotel undertook to offer renewal annually to ICCI .
But ICCI was not obliged to accept any such offer .
The duty of disclosure thus remained .
Mr Smith was a straightforward witness .
His days as an active fire underwriter lie some time in the past .
They ended effectively in 1980, when he took up higher managerial responsibilities .
But he did not escape from all underwriting involvement thereafter .
Underwriters would still come and see him and ask advice and a variety of cases was thus "continually referred" to him .
He was qualified to give the relevant expert evidence .
In his report he referred to the concern raised by moral hazard at different levels, running from maintenance of management and housekeeping standards to exaggerated claims and on to criminal arson or malicious damage .
He identified as particularly significant the fact that Royal Hotel\'s conduct in (1) to (5) related to poor trading performance, which could itself give a motive for "extreme action" to insurers\' prejudice .
Following a comment which I made at the outset of the trial, he supplemented his report with certain literature from the library of the Chartered Insurance Institute, in particular an extract from Hickmott on Interruption Insurance and two prize papers from a 1987 essay competition, Dr R. A. Litton\'s "Moral Hazard and Insurance Fraud" and A.E.B .
Alport\'s "Risk and Behaviour: some notes towards a definition of moral hazard" .
It is clear from Mr Smith\'s evidence and these two papers that, although the existence of moral hazard as a relevant concept is beyond doubt, its scope and facets have been the subject of very limited discussion and examination .
Mr Smith made a pertinent comment, when he observed that textbook authors preferred to restrict themselves to cases which had come to trial .
Leaving aside straightforward situations (such as motoring offences or prior losses covered by questions in a proposal form), it seems likely that there is a high percentage of cases where proposers do not reveal, and insurers never know about, matters creating a moral hazard .
It is only after a loss, if at all, that the matters come to light .
However, to ask an insurer whether he would expect a proposer to disclose such matters is, as May J. clearly saw, not the right question .
Materiality does not depend on what the ordinary insured would or would not be expected to disclose in the practical world .
It depends upon what a prudent underwriter would, if he knew it, take into account when assessing the risk .
It is probably fair comment both (a) that because of the human propensity not  to  disclose embarrassing or prejudicial material, expert underwriters may be unable to speak on the materiality of matters of potential moral hazard with as much direct experience as they can apply to other familiar features of a risk (e.g .
the materiality of a working sprinkler system) and (b) that the limited occasions on which matters of moral hazard come to light and the fact that they commonly do so only during investigation of a claim, tend to make moral hazard appear both rarer and more significant than it would be if a complete picture could be obtained of all undisclosed moral hazard in insurance risks .
These are points which ought, it seems to me, to be taken into account when evaluating expert evidence in the present area .
Ms Bucknall cross-examined Mr Smith and Mr Walpole of ICCI by reference to the combined insurance proposal form disclosed by ICG, which could embrace hotel insurance and was itself based on a Royal Insurance form, as well as by reference to various standard forms of proposal which she put  to  him as being used by the Royal Insurance and other leading companies .
No proposal form was actually required by ICCI in respect of the insurance of the Royal Hotel .
Mr Walpole explained that the proposal disclosed was designed for small risks .
The Royal Hotel was a large risk, the insurance of which was placed through a broker, who would be expected to advise Royal Hotel as to the range of matters material to be disclosed .
In any event the proposal forms examined do not appear to me of any real assistance .
They contain specific questions about convictions .
It does not follow that there may not be other aspects of moral hazard which would be material for disclosure .
Many of the proposal forms produced (including ICCI\'s own form) contain a question reminding the proposer of the general duty to disclose any other material information .
Taking account of all these matters, I conclude without hesitation that Royal Hotel\'s conduct in preparing the false Consolidator invoices for use if and when necessary or desirable in relation to bankers would have been a matter which any prudent underwriter would have taken into account, if it had been known to him, when assessing whether to renew the Royal Hotel\'s fire insurance risk .
Good faith between the parties is, as Mr Smith indicated, at the heart of such an insurance .
I accept, as Mr Smith said, that a propensity to dishonesty towards bankers, involving the careful preparation  of  false invoices to distort the hotel\'s trading figures, would be "plainly material" to any prudent insurer .
It would suggest both a risk of distortion of any figures which might be presented in the context of a material damage claim as well as the possibility of other still more serious types of dishonesty m relation to the property and claims .
(B)   INDUCEMENT To justify avoidance, it is not only necessary to establish materiality in the sense just considered; the actual underwriter must also show that he himself was actually induced by ignorance of the material matters not disclosed to enter into the insurance on the terms on which he in fact did .
In  Pan Atlantic , which establishes this second requirement, Lord Mustill mentioned without exploring in any detail the presumption of inducement that may arise once materiality is shown .
In principle, however, the two concepts are distinct .
The one does not necessarily involve the other although the two overlap .
That is the very essence of the decision itself in  Pan Atlantic  .
It cannot, necessarily, be assumed that a matter which a prudent underwriter would take into account would lead any or every prudent underwriter, still less the actual underwriter to any different underwriting decision .
In obvious cases it may be so, in others it may not .
The following statement of the position was thus approved as correct by the Court of Appeal in  St. Paul : "The existence of such a presumption is recognized in the authorities: see Halsbury\'s Laws of England vol .
31 par .
1067 where the law is stated as follows: "Inducement cannot be inferred in law from proved materiality, although there may be cases where the materiality is so obvious as to justify an inference of fact that the representee was actually induced, but, even in such exceptional cases, the inference is only a prima facie one and may rebutted by counter evidence. .
In  Marc Rich & Co. A.G. v. Portman  [1996] 1 Ll.R .
430, decided before  St. Paul  .
Longmore J. pointed out that in most cases in which the actual underwriter is called to give evidence the court will be able to make up its own mind on inducement, and in cases where he is called and the court cannot decide the underwriter will  ex hypothesi  have been unable to satisfy the legal burden resting on him .
The presumption, he suggested, will only come into play in those cases in which the underwriter cannot (for good reason) be called to give evidence and there is no reason to suppose that the actual underwriter acted other than prudently in writing the risk .
Even this appears to pre-suppose that any prudent underwriter would not only have wanted to take the matter into account, but would, in probability, have declined in its light to write the risk on the terms in fact accepted .
In the present case the relevant hierarchy within ICCI consisted in 1991 of Mr Bray as commercial underwriting assistant, working in a team headed by the commercial controller Mrs Butler, above whom in seniority was Mr Peter Morris, the business manager, and then Mr Peter Walpole, the managing director .
Mr Bray also acted as part-time executive assistant to Mr Walpole .
In a small company, relations were informal and all these individuals had ready access to each other .
Mr Bray and Mr Walpole gave oral evidence .
Hearsay statements were adduced from Mrs Butler and Mr Morris on the grounds that they could not be called as a witness at the trial because they were "beyond the seas" .
Mr Morris has since May 1992 been managing director of Rossboroughs, brokers who acted for Royal Hotel in the placing of the present insurances and the presentation of claims under them .
His statement records that he met and discussed the matter with both Mr McHugh and Mr Walpole and Mr Bray in or after October 1996 .
No evidence was adduced that Mr Morris or Mr Butler would not in fact have been willing to attend court or to give oral evidence by video-link .
Mr Bray actually dealt with the 1991 renewal of the material damage insurance .
In this context he reviewed and annotated a claims record "pre-list" dated 4th September 1991 .
Since that showed more than three claims (albeit none significant) since inception, the renewal would have required special review .
Since Mr Bray only had authority up to only \xc2\xa32 million he would anyway have reported on the renewal to Mrs Butler or to Mr Morris direct .
Since her authority was limited to \xc2\xa33.5 million, Mrs Butler referred the renewal to Mr Morris, though it appears that he would not ordinarily do more than verify the adequacy of the reinsurance arrangements made .
Mr Morris\'s underwriting authority was strictly limited to \xc2\xa35 million, but in practice Mr Walpole allowed him flexibility and leeway .
What would have happened had ICCI known of Royal Hotel\'s conduct set out in paragraphs (1) to (5) above .
I think it right to formulate the question in this way .
If one asks what would have happened if Royal Hotel itself had disclosed such conduct, the very question introduces an element of frankness which was not present .
Even the question I have formulated involves an opposite problem, on which I have touched above .
The occasions when insurers will on placing or renewal know of an insured\'s dishonest conduct must be fewer than the occasions when there has in fact been such conduct .
For this reason, to ask particular insurers about their attitude if they had known of particular dishonest conduct in the context of a specific insurance may risk putting a question which is somewhat loaded against the insured .
In reality however most insurers will be aware that moral hazard must be a much more frequent occurrence than the occasions on which it is disclosed or detected .
This still leaves the difficulty that questions of moral hazard appear commonly to arise after the event of a loss, when it is easy and insurers have every incentive to adopt a strict attitude .
This difficulty is particularly acute in a case such as the present where it can be seen with hindsight that the moral hazard has in fact materialized .
It is one which the court should recognize and take into account when seeking to identify what, realistically, would have been the actual insurers\' reaction to the relevant conduct at the time of placing or renewal .
Mr Bray had in April 1991 successfully taken the final set of Chartered Insurance Institute examinations for Associateship and was able  to  produce before me his copy  of  the CII textbook "Property Insurance Risk Assessment and Control" .
His copy contains throughout the signs of his study in the form of marginal annotations and summaries .
On the page dealing with moral hazard he noted amongst other points that the range of insureds extended from "perpetrators of fraud to utmost meticulousness" and that consequences of moral hazard were "avariousness in claims negotiations" and "insurance companies fair game - a tendency to exaggerate" .
He also underlined the single passage emphasizing the need for insurers "in all cases [to] exercise care when selecting policyholders to ensure that they are honest and straightforward, careful for the safety of their property and not in financial difficulties" .
I accept Mr Bray\'s oral evidence that, if he had known of Royal Hotel\'s conduct, he would immediately have referred it to one or other of his superiors .
Although she did not attend for cross-examination, I also accept Mrs Butler\'s written statement that she would have referred the matter on to Mr Morris, or to Mr Walpole in his absence .
Since there is no reason to believe that Mr Morris would have been absent, the matter would therefore have been referred to him .
In his statement Mr Morris says that knowledge that inter-company transactions such as those represented by the Consolidator invoices existed and were fraudulent "would have had a considerable impact on my attitude towards underwriting the policy", that it "would have raised the question of moral hazard and, as a matter of policy, it would have caused me to discuss the matter with Mr Peter Walpole with a view to agreeing an appropriate course of action" .
Reading his statement, including the note to it, as a whole, I do not think that he meant more by "fraudulent" inter-company transactions than that they were brought into existence with dishonest intent .
I bear in mind that he was not tendered for cross-examination .
Mr Walpole considered however that "... the seriousness of the situation was such that he would have referred it to me eventually, before making a decision, unless it was urgent and I was away from the island, but I think he would have tried to get hold of me" .
An earlier passage in Mr Walpole\'s evidence indicates that Mr Walpole was under the misapprehension that "the deliberate impression was being given to the bankers that the hotel was doing rather well" .
In fact the position at renewal was simply that the Consolidator invoices had been brought into existence and the hotel\'s trading figures manipulated  so as  to create a more favourable picture  if and when  it became either necessary or desirable to show management or annual accounts to one or other of the bankers .
It was only in March 1992 that this purpose was implemented by supplying RNB with the February 1992 management accounts distorted by the Consolidator invoices .
But I do not consider that Mr Walpole or Mr Morris would at the time have drawn any distinction between an unfulfilled but continuing intention to use dishonestly created accounting figures as and when necessary or desirable in relation to bankers and a situation where they had actually been so used .
Mr Walpole\'s evidence was that, if he had known of Royal Hotel\'s conduct, he would have declined to allow renewal, on the ground of moral hazard .
In assessing this evidence and the extent to which ICCI has made out its case, certain other background factors require mention .
Firstly, the long-term insurance agreement appears in practice to have had some impact on ICCI\'s attitude to the extent to which it could or should seek more stringent terms, but it was not suggested that this would have been of any real significance to its reaction to moral hazard .
Secondly, no proposal was used for the present renewal .
For reasons already indicated, neither this nor the other forms of proposal put to Mr Smith have however any real weight in the present context .
Thirdly, Mr Walpole gave oral evidence that the population of the Channel Islands is essentially very genuine, sincere and honest .
He also said that the economy had also been fairly buoyant for many years and that it was rare for an organization to be trading at a loss .
This evidence contrasts somewhat with his witness statement, where he said that any inference that Royal Hotel was doing so badly that Mr McHugh had caused false documents to be created to misrepresent the truth would have been a considerable concern to him "particularly in a recession (October 1991), when there was already growing concern about arson" .
Mr Walpole went on however to say that he had never knowingly insured a person whom he believed to be dishonest, as to do so would diminish the quality of ICCI\'s risk portfolio .
Fourthly, the two Royal Hotel insurances represented among the larger risks in ICCI\'s portfolio, though the largest risk was about four or five times as large .
They generated over \xc2\xa330,000 per annum in premium income, somewhat less than three per cent of ICCI\'s total premium income at the time .
ICCI had built up its portfolio of business, consisting mainly of Channel Island risks and entirely of risks with some Channel Island connection, by "underpricing of our products in a selective and sensitive way, best suited to the characteristics of the market" .
This meant that it used its local presence and appreciation of local conditions, particularly in areas such as weather, to offer lower premiums than United Kingdom companies which tended to treat the Channel Islands as another English county .
Because of its size ICCI remained dependant on reinsurance, but that would not have encouraged it to regard itself as unexposed, for the obvious reason that such an attitude would have imperilled the availability of reinsurance at economic rates .
Fifthly, in December 1992, during the course of events following the fires, insurers became aware of adverse comments in a DTI report affecting Mr Slater, the individual ultimately behind Royal Hotel and its group, but took no steps to avoid any of the insurances on that ground .
Apparently, the report recorded the inspectors\' view that the conduct of Mr Slater and another in and about the prosecution of their bid for Norwest Hoist "was deplorable and showed scant respect for the responsibilities of directors of public companies and the interests of shareholders" and the inspectors recommended prosecution of Mr Slater under the Companies Act 1967 ss .
27 and 33 .
No prosecution took place .
The events in question went back, I was told, to shareholdings acquired in 1972 and a takeover in the mid-1970s; the appointment of inspectors took place in March 1977 and their report was dated 24th April 1981 .
Insurers\' attitude when they learnt of these old events in December 1992 does not in my view furnish any guide to their likely attitude, had they known before renewal of the insurances in October 1991 of Royal Hotel\'s dishonest conduct involving the creation of, and the intention if and when necessary or desirable to use the Consolidator invoices relating directly to the insured hotel .
Looking at all the material before me, I am satisfied that all the underwriting personnel within ICCI and Mr Walpole as its managing director would have taken a serious view of Royal Hotel\'s conduct, and that ICCI would have been unlikely to offer renewal if it had known of such conduct before renewal .
I accept that the matter would have been likely to reach Mr Walpole\'s attention .
He was and is clearly the dominant character within ICCI .
Although he has an insurance background in fire surveying and risk assessment, broking (for a short time) and in setting up and in the early days underwriting for two direct writing and broker-fed insurance companies in the Channel Islands, his primary role over the last 14 years has been in management and administration .
In that role he would naturally be concerned about the quality of the ICCI\'s portfolio .
Although there could be minor exceptions, I consider that Mr Walpole was and is someone who would, if he had known of conduct such as the Royal Hotel\'s conduct set out in paragraphs (1) to (5) above, have adopted and applied the general attitude which he mentioned in his statement, that is of not knowingly insuring a person whom he believed to be dishonest and of refusing renewal accordingly .
I also consider that this is the attitude which any reputable and experienced insurer (like the present insurers) would have been likely to adopt in the face of dishonest conduct such as Royal Hotel\'s here .
I therefore find that ICCI was induced to underwrite the renewal of the material damage policy in October 1991 by non-disclosure of Royal Hotel\'s conduct set out in paragraphs (1)  to  (5) above .
(C)   AFFIRMATION Royal Hotel\'s pleaded case on affirmation involves consideration of the period from January 1993 up to my previous judgment dated 5th July 1996 .
During her final speech Miss Bucknall sought leave to add a further particular of affirmation referring to a consent order dated 24th July 1996 .
I heard submissions on this  de bene esse  and reserved my decision whether to grant leave .
In the event I refuse leave for reasons which will appear .
Law The principles governing affirmation (or election) were considered in my previous judgment at p. 126 .
My conclusions in the context of that action appear at pp .
132-3 .
In summary, the type of affirmation here in issue involves an informed choice (to treat the contract as continuing) made with knowledge of the facts giving rise to the right to avoid it .
Provided that the party knows sufficient of the facts to know that he has that right, it is unnecessary that he should know all aspects or incidents of those facts .
Although this point was left open in  The Kanchenjunga  [1990] 1 Ll.R .
391, there is Court of Appeal authority in  Peyman v. Lanjani  [1985] 1 Ch .
457 that the party must generally also know that he has that right .
The making of his choice must be communicated unequivocally to the other party before there can be a binding affirmation .
What is required for affirmation is knowledge, not any form of constructive knowledge .
Miss Bucknall submitted to the contrary, suggesting that the correct principle was reflected in a sentence from Chitty on Contracts (27th Ed. .
Vol .
l paragraph 24-006 to the effect that "[in] case of waiver by election the party who has to make the choice must either know or have obvious means of knowledge of the facts giving rise to the right ...." .
The cases cited,  Bremer Handelsges, mbH v. C. Mackprang Jr.  [1979] 1 Ll.R .
221 and  Avimex S.A. v. Dewulf & Cie  [1979] 2 Ll.R .
53 as well as  Cerealmangimi S.p.A. v. Toepfer (The Eurometal)  [1981] 1 Ll.R .
337 all ante-date both  Peyman v. Lanjani  and  The Kanchenjunga  and are anyway explicable as cases on estoppel, rather than election .
The sentence in Chitty is in my judgment wrong in suggesting that means of knowledge without knowledge itself could suffice .
Even so, a special problem may arise where a person has deliberately and knowingly decided not to investigate or confirm a matter about which he knows that he could acquire definite knowledge .
Similar problems have arisen in other areas of the law - see e.g .
the first three categories of knowledge suggested in  Baden v. Societe Generate  [1983] 1 W.L.R .
509, 575, in the areas to which it continues to be relevant following  Royal Brunei Airlines v. Tan  [1995] 1 A.C. 378, 392G .
Whether a person has knowledge is for lawyers essentially a jury question .
The meaning of knowledge has perplexed philosophers from Plato (and no doubt before) to after A.J .
Ayer, and been said by some to be ultimately unanswerable .
But as a matter of law and everyday understanding some points are reasonably clear .
First of all, I reject Miss Bucknall\'s submission that a party must be taken to know whatever he could properly plead .
The submission cannot be accepted, even if attention is confined to dishonest conduct which, under the Code of Conduct of the Bar of England and Wales, requires a pleader to have "before him reasonably credible material which as it stands establishes a prima facie case" .
At the other extreme, knowledge is not to be equated with absolute certainty, itself an ultimately elusive concept .
The impossibility of doubt which Descartes found only in the maxim "I think, therefore I exist" is not the criterion of legal knowledge .
For practical purposes, knowledge pre-supposes the truth of the matters known, and a firm belief in their truth, as well as sufficient justification for that belief in terms of experience, information and/or reasoning .
The element of regression or circularity involved in this description indicates why knowledge is a jury question .
The other aspect to affirmation is that it requires an unequivocal communication to the other party of the making of the choice .
In  Scarf v, Jardine  (1882) 7 App .
Cas .
345, 360-1, cited by Slade L.J .
in P eyman v. Lanjani  .
Lord Blackburn said at pp.360-1: "The principle, I take it, running through all the cases as to what is an election is this, that where a party in his own mind has thought that he would choose one of two remedies, even though he has written it down on a memorandum or has indicated it in some other way, that alone will not bind him; but so soon as he has not only determined to follow one of his remedies but has communicated it to the other side in such a way as to lead the opposite party to believe that he has made that choice, he has completed his election and can go no further; and whether he intended it or not, if he has done an unequivocal act - I mean an act which would be justifiable if he had elected one way and would not be justifiable if he had elected the other way -the fact of his having done that unequivocal act to the knowledge of the persons concerned is an election. .
Although dicta in  Kammins Ballrooms Co. Ltd. v. Zenith Investments (Torquay) Ltd.  [10971] A.C. 850 were not followed in  Payman v. Lanjani  on the question whether knowledge of the right to choose was itself also necessary, Lord Diplock\'s reference at pp.882-3 to a party with alternative rights acting "in a manner which is only consistent with his having chosen to rely on one of them" remains relevant .
Where the circumstances justify an avoidance and the choice is to avoid, the requirement of an unequivocal communication creates no problem .
The claim to avoid demonstrates of itself at one and the same time awareness of the choice and its making .
Where it is said that there has been an election to affirm rather than to avoid, the position is more problematic .
Is it sufficient for affirmation that there is knowledge and a communication (by words or conduct) which,  assuming such knowledge, demonstrates an unequivocal choice .
Or must the communication itself or the surrounding circumstances demonstrate such knowledge to the other party .
In principle, it seems to me that the latter approach is correct in the context of affirmation .
The communication itself or the circumstances must demonstrate objectively or unequivocally that the party affirming is making an informed choice .
In the context of estoppel, where knowledge is not a pre-requisite (though reliance is), it is in contrast the appearance of choice with which the law is concerned .
Authority on these points is not easy to find, and dicta of Herring C.J .
in  Coastal Estates Pty .
Ltd. v. Melevende  [1965] V.R .
433 quoted with approval by Stephenson L.J .
in  Peyman v. Lanjani  at p.489D-E may be said to point towards the former approach .
Slade L. J\'s judgment in  Payman v. Lanjani  at pp.502-3 does however offer clear support for the latter approach .
Whether there was an unequivocal communication of a choice depended, in his view, on whether the other party had reason to believe that the party allegedly affirming was aware of the facts and of his right to object or affirm .
In my previous judgment at pp .
132-3, I also held that whether there had been an unequivocal representation had to be considered in the context of Royal Hotel\'s knowledge about what insurers knew or did not know .
Whether conduct amounts to an unequivocal communication of a choice to affirm requires therefore, an objective assessment of the impact of the relevant conduct on a reasonable person in the position of the other party to the contract .
A reasonable person in that position must, it seems to me, be treated as having a general understanding of the possibility of choice between affirmation and objection .
In affirmation (as distinct from estoppel), the actual state of mind of the other party is not the test .
Affirmation depends on the objective manifestation of a choice .
I do not read Lord Blackburn\'s reference to communication to the other side in such a way as to lead the other party to believe that he had make a choice as intended to suggest the contrary .
Where, as here, the potential choice is whether or not to avoid on the ground of non-disclosure of matters material  to  be known to a prudent insurer which induced the actual insurer to enter into the insurance on the terms on which he did .
it might be asked how far a reasonable person in the insured\'s position would be aware what matters were material to a prudent insurer or what matters had induced the actual insurer, and, how, short of such awareness, the reasonable person could regard any conduct of insurers as unequivocal .
In insurance law and practice, the reasonable insured and the prudent insurer are somewhat different concepts .
The authorities do not, I think, address this potential conundrum .
In the present case, Royal Hotel\'s undisclosed conduct can be regarded as so obviously material and so obviously likely to have induced insurers to enter into any insurance that a reasonable person would proceed on that basis, unless otherwise instructed .
The conundrum, if it exists, does not require resolution here .
Facts In the light of these principles, I return to the facts .
I heard evidence from Mr Martin Bakes of Herbert Smith, Mr Carter of Royal Insurance and Mr Walpole of ICO .
My previous judgment dealt at some length on pages 128-9 and 130-3 with insurers\' state of knowledge between the end of 1992 and the date in November 1993 when insurers concluded that they had a proper basis to assert fraud to obtain benefit under the business interruption insurance .
I held that up to and including this date insurers did not have full knowledge of the relevant circumstances; that had been withheld from them by Royal Hotel; the only representations that insurers could be treated as having made up to that stage were that they did not have full information or a full understanding of the position, that they were anxious to achieve this, that they had wanted to cross-examine Mrs Farnon and Mr McHugh in the arbitration for that reason and that, once it became clear that those witnesses were not to be called, insurers were very likely to assert that there had been fraud to obtain benefit, in the absence of any satisfactory last minute explanation .
Herbert Smith\'s letters dated 12th and 19th October 1993 gave Royal Hotel a last chance to put forward such an explanation .
Royal Hotel\'s rejection of their requests led to insurers\' avoidance for fraud to obtain benefit by letter dated 23rd November 1993 .
The existence of the BCS and Consolidator invoices came to light during the course of discovery in the arbitrations around the middle of 1993 .
In mid-1993 Royal Hotel announced that its directors had concluded that its 1993 accounts should include a prior year adjustment reversing the transactions with BCS, which Royal Hotel\'s expert accountant in the business interruption arbitration (Mr Haberman) told insurers\' expert (Mr Lee) on 6th October 1993 that he suspected had been included in Royal Hotel\'s accounts to "massage" the figures, though neither he nor Mrs Farnon knew why .
Mr Haberman\'s report dated 5th October 1993 said that he had "ascertained" by discussion with Mrs Farnon and Mr McHugh that the rooms charged to Consolidator were occupied by related company employees and "represent actual occupancy", but determined to leave them out of consideration on the basis that "they do not represent a source of repeat or recommended business as would conventional occupants" .
A distinction was thus being drawn between the BCS and Consolidator invoices .
For present purposes it is insurers\' state of mind regarding the Consolidator transactions which is critical .
Herbert Smith\'s letter dated 19th October 1993 recorded that insurers were deeply troubled about both the BCS and Consolidator transactions .
It said that prima facie the BCS invoices appeared to be dishonest documents, that Price Waterhouse (in the person of Mr Lee) had been unable to think of any other explanation for them and that, although Royal Hotel had sought to distinguish the Consolidator invoices, "they are very similar, and your clients have declined to provide any details to support their suggestion that Consolidator received significant consideration for the charges made to it" .
It went on to assert that the failure to call either Mrs Farnon or Mr McHugh "raises the inevitable inference that you are unwilling to make them available for cross-examination because they are unable to give a proper explanation to show (a) that the Consolidator and BCS documentation was prepared honestly and (b) that the statements made in relation to it, i.e .
that our clients could rely upon it and that it supported a trend of materially increased business as stated by Mr McHugh were made honestly. .
The letter dated 23rd November 1993 recorded that the inference which insurers drew from Royal Hotel\'s failure to respond in any meaningful sense to the points raised was that Royal was unable to do so, and that "Our clients conclude therefore that there is no honest explanation for the BCS documentation .
It may well be that the same considerations arise in respect of the Consolidator documentation in that whilst your clients have sought to distinguish between the two, they have refused to answer our questions which have been directed towards a proper understanding of that distinction. .
The previous action ("the 1994 action") was begun on 24th January 1994 .
The "statement of claim" endorsed on the writ asserted that the statistics supplied to Cunningham Hart by Royal Hotel\'s letter dated 19th August 1992 "were knowingly false and misleading in that they included figures relating to the BCS and Consolidator transactions .
The Consolidator invoices are similar in all material respects to the BCS documentation and represent fictitious transactions. .
Royal Hotel\'s points of defence and counterclaim served 24th March 1994 pleaded (in what was then paragraph 18.17) that Mr McHugh had in mid-June 1991 instructed Mr Anquetil to raise invoices to Consolidator in the sum of \xc2\xa3150,000 at the rate of \xc2\xa350,000 per month for the following three months, that during January to August 1991 the hotel had provided accommodation for contractors\' staff working on Havilland Hall and the hotel on behalf of Royal Hotel and other group companies and that "The sum of \xc2\xa3150,000 was a reasonable sum for this accommodation" .
On 25th March 1994 Sir Patrick Neill Q.C .
issued his first interim award in the material damage arbitration .
Insurers\' application for leave to appeal was dismissed by Longmore J. on 10th June 1994 .
Insurers then made a payment to Royal Hotel in respect of the material damage award on 21st June 1994, obtaining an order on 28th July 1994 that involved payment of \xc2\xa3950,000 into a joint account pending trial of the 1994 action .
Royal Hotel\'s solicitors sought from Sir Patrick a second interim award for costs of the material damage arbitration, which they submitted should follow the event .
After letters from them and Sir Patrick, Herbert Smith responded on 12th October 1994: " Material Damage Award We are content that this should be dealt with in the manner proposed. .
Sir Patrick thought it ambiguous whether they were concurring simply in a second interim award or also in its being in Royal Hotel\'s favour, but Herbert Smith did not respond to his request of 18th October 1994 seeking this clarification .
In the 1994 action, points of reply and defence to counterclaim were served on 29th April 1994 and a request was made on 14th June 1994 for particulars of the allegations in the points of defence regarding contractors and accommodation and as to how the \xc2\xa3150,000 was calculated to support the allegation that it was a reasonable sum for such accommodation .
They were ordered by Waller J. on 7th October .
When supplied on 25th November 1994, they stated that staff were accommodated not at the hotel but "in premises known as Ypres Guest House, Kingslynn and Fermoygave" .
They explained the basis of the \xc2\xa3150,000 as being: "The estimated income requirements of the Hotel in the light of the delay in the works being carried out at the Hotel. .
During a meeting to discuss these particulars within Herbert Smith, Mr Bakes noted on his copy of this page of the particulars the words "Moral hazard" and "Rel\'ship with Banks" .
On about 22nd May 1995 witness statements by Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil were served in the 1994 action .
Mr McHugh\'s statement confirmed that the contractors\' workmen had been housed in staff accommodation (Ypres Guest House, Kingslynn and Fermoy) and other guest houses, and not therefore in the rooms shown in the Consolidator invoices .
The statement recounted that in mid-1991 the hotel had cash flow difficulties and was supported by Consolidator in a variety of ways, and went on: "20 .
I then had to decide how this financial support should be shown in RHL\'s accounts .
I did not want to account for the payment as loans, as they would simply have increased RHL\'s liabilities to the group and weakened the balance sheet .
I therefore decided to treat the payments as income, by including charges from RHL to Consolidator, Our banks knew that RHL was being supported by the group until the new business was established and were pleased that we had improved the Hotel and upgraded the business .
21 .
In or around June 1991 I therefore instructed Stephen Anquetil, an accounts clerk with responsibility for the preparation of the Hotel\'s management accounts, to raise charges to Consolidator in the sum of \xc2\xa3150,000: \xc2\xa350,000 for each of the following three months .
This was my estimate of the income which would be required to support the Hotel in the light of the delays. .
On 13th April 1995 Sir Patrick Neill issued a second interim award awarding Royal Hotel its costs of the material damage arbitration .
He recorded that, since Herbert Smith had been given more than one opportunity to resist such an order, he had to conclude that there was no submission that they wished to make in opposition .
On 7th November 1995 Royal Hotel\'s solicitors sent Herbert Smith a detailed summary of costs and disbursements in the material damage arbitration seeking to reach agreement without need for taxation .
On 22nd November 1995 Herbert Smith requested copy invoices relating to experts\' and counsels\' fees and other matters to enable them to consider the disbursements claimed in more detail, and these were then sent .
After further pressure from Royal Hotel\'s solicitors to agree costs with a 10% discount against the sums claimed (failing which such solicitors threatened an application to vary the order relating to the \xc2\xa3950,000), Herbert Smith wrote on 22nd December 1995 that they were seeking instructions and that Royal Hotel\'s time limit of 29th December 1995 was unreasonable, and again on 22nd December, after taking instructions, that Royal Hotel\'s offer was unacceptable .
A letter from Herbert Smith to Royal Insurance of the same date recorded that the thinking behind this was, first, that insurers had good prospects of a better discount on taxation, secondly, that agreement on costs might simply provide Royal Hotel with a fighting fund for the impending trial of the "fraud" (i.e .
1994) action and, thirdly, that "(c) Consideration is to be given to the possible impact of the outcome of the fraud action on the material damage award .
It is safe to assume that any money paid over to Royal Hotel will be extremely difficult to recover. .
In November/December 1995 Mr Bakes with assistance from counsel prepared a draft amended statement of claim, which was served in January 1996 pursuant to leave granted on 13th December 1995 .
It added to the existing allegations, that the BCS and Consolidator transactions represented fictitious transactions, further allegations that they were "(a) .... entered into, as Mr McHugh and, by him, Royal Hotel knew at the time of the transactions, to mislead Royal Hotel\'s bankers as to the state of its balance sheer and/or (b) they included figures relating to the BCS and Consolidator transactions, which in whole or in part did not represent any or any real occupancy of the hotel and/or did not represent occupancy of the hotel in the ordinary course of its business as a hotel .
The Plaintiffs will say that such occupancy as there may have been by workmen employed for the benefit of the Defendants or either of them (as to which no admissions are made) was not occupancy of the hotel in the ordinary course of its business as a hotel. .
At the end of January 1996 Royal Hotel served supplementary statements from Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil in the 1994 action .
Mr McHugh insisted that his instructions to Mr Anquetil to raise the BCS and Consolidator "charges" were given pre-fire in mid-June 1991 and March/April 1992 and were nothing more than a straightforward way of providing internal support, which it was Mr Anquetil\'s job to process .
Mr Anquetil sought to say that reference in his previous statement to his being instructed by Mr McHugh to raise some invoices to Consolidator had not been significant, that he could not remember Mr McHugh\'s actual words and that it was he who drafted the invoices and by them allocated charges within existing room categories .
He suggested that this was because charges had to be allocated for management account and general ledger purposes and "the only way I could think of to deal with this was to split the charges between rooms that had been unlet during the relevant months .
It did not occur to me at the time to create a special category in the management accounts to which these charges could be attributed .
I split the charges within the existing room categories on my own initiative. .
Mr McHugh and Mr Anquetil persisted in this explanation of events throughout the trial before me, at the end of which I disbelieved their evidence on the point, and concluded that the invoices were deliberately created by Mr Anquetil on Mr McHugh\'s instructions in order to manipulate the management and annual accounts to create a more favourable picture if and when it became necessary or desirable to show these to Royal Hotel\'s bankers .
The trial of the 1994 action began on 7th February 1996 .
Judgment on claim and counterclaim were given on 5th July 1996 to the effect summarized at the start of this judgment .
In the light of my judgment, insurers and Herbert Smith took independent expert advice on materiality, discussed materiality, inducement and the prospects of Royal Hotel establishing affirmation, decided to avoid the material damage insurance and on 12th August 1996 wrote accordingly .
Oral evidence The oral evidence of Mr Bakes and Mr Carter filled in and dealt with the state of mind of those representing insurers 1  interests during the period from 1993 to 1996 .
On the evidence, Herbert Smith have for several decades been regularly engaged by Royal Insurance to handle most of their large and high profile claims, as well as policy interpretation and litigious matters .
The relationship is one of closeness and considerable confidence, in which Royal Hotel looked to Herbert Smith when they wanted the highest quality of legal assistance .
Royal Insurance, which instructed Herbert Smith on behalf of both itself and ICCI, thus relied upon Herbert Smith to look after the interests of insurers during the arbitrations and the preparation for the 1994 trial and, as Mr Carter confirmed, to make judgments that required to be made during their course .
Before me, Herbert Smith\'s state of mind and handling of both the arbitrations and the 1994 action have been treated for all purposes as synonymous with insurers\' .
No suggestion has been made that any knowledge which may have been possessed or decision which may have been taken by Herbert Smith was not or should not be attributed for any relevant purposes to both ICCI and Royal Insurance .
This is relevant, since Herbert Smith at some points conducted matters without specific reference back to insurers .
Mr Carter\'s evidence was that, since fraud is a very serious allegation, he would in general only advance such a case where there was clear evidence and no satisfactory explanation .
Herbert Smith\'s letters dated 19th October and 23rd November 1993 were drafted by Herbert Smith, who "had a much more detailed understanding of the facts than me" but he saw and approved them before they were sent .
His statement said that he remembered being of the view that it remained possible that Royal Hotel would come up with an explanation for the BCS and Consolidator invoices .
He saw the statement of claim and points of defence in the 1994 action in January and March 1994, but did not analyse them, leaving the running of the action to Herbert Smith .
Herbert Smith had drawn his attention to paragraph 18.17 of the points of defence, which indicated that the invoices were created around the time when they were dated; it was also "surprising" in so far as it indicated that they related to staff accommodation .
When payment was made in respect of the material damage award in June 1994, he was not aware of any case against Royal Hotel which would permit insurers to avoid the material damage policy and withhold such payment .
During the trial of the 1994 action, he believed that insurers\' case would be upheld, but "we were, however, by no means sure of how the facts would emerge and remained fully reserved for our line at, I believe, \xc2\xa310m until we received the judgment ...." .
Royal Insurance\'s initial and principal contact within Herbert Smith was the senior partner in the insurance litigation group, Mr D. Higgins .
He in turn involved Mr Bakes, by then a very experienced insurance litigator who had qualified as a solicitor in 1980 and became a partner in 1987 .
Mr Bakes was assisted by Ms H. Kydd, a senior assistant solicitor and a partner from 1st May 1994, who had been away from the London office since 1992 but had some experience of insurance cases between 1988 and 1991 .
The only one of these three who gave evidence before me was Mr Bakes, who had the day to day handling of the matter .
He was in daily contact with Mr Higgins, so that there was opportunity for discussion whenever appropriate .
Documents such as the points of defence would normally reach Mr Higgins first, because of his reference on incoming post, and he in fact drew Mr Bakes\'s attention to paragraph 18.17 in the points of defence .
Mr Higgins would have had the final decision on major matters .
Mr Bakes\'s statement, which was adduced as his evidence in chief, described how a question-mark arose over the "honesty" of the BCS transactions as a result of their reversal in Royal Hotel\'s accounts in late June 1993, Mr Lee\'s advice that he could not think of an honest explanation and a comment by counsel for Royal Hotel in the arbitration that they had taken place "in order to boost the revenue of the Royal Hotel" .
But, Mr Bakes said, as best as he could recall he was waiting to hear what Mr McHugh and Mrs Farnon said in cross-examination .
The Consolidator invoices looked very similar, and Royal Hotel\'s solicitors had not explained any difference, but they had not been reversed .
Mr Haberman\'s report maintained that the distinction lay in actual occupancy, although he withdrew reliance upon the Consolidator invoices .
Only after the refusal to call Mr McHugh and Mrs Farnon in arbitration, did Mr Bakes carry out a full factual analysis, when preparing the letter dated 19th October 1993 .
That letter was seeking to ensure that they had as much information as possible, including any explanations from the insured, before advising their clients on the question of fraud .
As to the letter dated 23rd November 1993 written after Royal Hotel\'s refusal to give any further explanation, Mr Bakes recalled that he probably did speculate whether it would make any difference to insurers\' case on fraud in the claims context, if the BCS and Consolidator invoices had been prepared initially not to defraud insurers, but to mislead others such as Royal Hotel\'s bankers, and concluded that it would not, if the invoices had subsequently been used dishonestly to present the claim .
He said that his state of mind regarding the Consolidator invoices, both then and later when drafting proceedings, was that "there was (just) a sufficient basis to allege that they might be dishonest documents alongside the BCS invoices (in respect of which I felt on firmer ground - although I was always conscious that Royal Hotel might ultimately have some explanation even for those). .
A non-disclosure point did not then occur to him .
Paragraph 18.17 of Royal Hotel\'s points of defence appeared to be trying to offer an innocent explanation for the Consolidator invoices, but he "found it opaque and it did not ring true" .
The particulars of the points of defence served in November 1994 "seemed  to  me  to  indicate that the Consolidator invoices appeared to be on all fours with the BCS invoices", and made him "more confident that there was not an innocent explanation for the Consolidator invoices" .
It then occurred to him that it might be open to insurers to avoid .
The "moral hazard" which he noted on his copy of the particulars in November 1994 was dishonesty in relation to bankers .
It brought to his mind the possibility of avoidance of the material damage insurance, as well as - he confirmed in oral evidence - the business interruption insurance .
In three lengthy paragraphs (Nos .
47-49) Mr Bakes sought to describe the attitude adopted then and thereafter in discussion which took place, though not he said of any great length, between Mr Higgins, Ms Kydd and himself about this potential non-disclosure point and about whether there were any steps that should be taken in its light .
The gist of Mr Bakes\' account in paragraphs 47-48 was that Herbert Smith were troubled that the factual position remained unclear; a distinction was still drawn between the BCS invoices and supported by KPMG; they had formed the view that they were dealing with untrustworthy people at Royal Hotel, but they recognized a danger that they might be allowing essentially personal and instinctive reactions to get in the way of providing objective and dispassionate advice; all the relevant evidence was in Royal Hotel\'s hands and they knew that the burden of proving fraud was a heavy one .
In these circumstances, according to paragraph 48: "We decided that the prudent course was to see how the facts emerged at trial and in particular what findings of fact were made by the judge at trial before giving further consideration to a possible non-disclosure case .
I was concerned, for example, that Royal Hotel might call evidence from its bankers saying that they had been fully informed of the circumstances which lay behind the invoices .
I was also concerned that Royal Hotel (as had been contended in the letter of 11th June 1993) had allocated the rooms shown in the Consolidator invoices to Consolidator and that whilst these rooms had not been occupied, the allocation might be sufficient to justify the invoices .
I recognized that this was not a case that Royal Hotel had yet advanced in the action and that if it was raised it would of itself raise a number of questions about the availability of rooms for occupation, but given that it had successfully changed its case in the arbitration at the last minute I felt that it might do something similar in this action as well .
We felt that because of these uncertainties the correct course was to await the outcome of the fraud action. .
Mr Bakes went on in paragraph 49 to say that this approach was not materially affected by Mr McHugh\'s and Mr Anquetil\'s witness or supplementary witness statements in February 1996 .
This account of the thinking in and after November 1994 was not recorded in any contemporaneous document .
The only documents, privileged or unprivileged, which bear on the present issues in the whole period from November 1994 to the date of my judgment in the 1994 action, are Mr Bakes\' copy of the particulars annotated "Moral hazard" and the letter dated 22nd December 1995 .
Further, the reference to providing objective and dispassionate advice does not mean that any advice was in fact given to insurers following the discussion of November 1994 .
On the evidence, the consequence of whatever view was then taken was that no mention was made to insurers of any possible avoidance point .
Any communication with Royal Insurance on such a point would in practice have been by Mr Higgins .
Mr Bakes did not speak to Royal Insurance on the point until early 1996 .
He had a very vague recollection of Mr Higgins telling him at some point that he had mentioned the point to Mr Carter, but could give no time or detail .
In the light of Mr Carter\'s evidence, I find that this mention did not occur until late 1995, shortly before Ms Kydd\'s letter dated 22nd December 1995 .
Although the discussion within Herbert Smith in November 1994 was short, Mr Bakes\'s account of his thinking in the paragraphs which I have summarized was detailed .
It does however face the problem that insurers were already alleging fraud, involving reliance on both the BCS and the Consolidator transactions as fictitious .
The concerns and scruples emphasized by Mr Bakes\'s statement had not prevented Herbert Smith as experienced litigators from pleading fraud .
According to Mr Bakes\'s oral evidence, the adverse view of the honesty of those behind Royal Hotel which he had formed had in fact been a factor encouraging him in his plea of fraud in the January 1994 statement of claim .
It is clear that nothing since then can have done anything to diminish that view .
Further, in November 1995, Herbert Smith with counsel\'s assistance actually amended their pleadings in the 1994 action to allege expressly that both the BCS and the Consolidator invoices had been prepared to mislead bankers .
The considerations expressed in paragraphs 47 and 48 of Mr Bakes\'s statement could not explain why, as suggested in paragraph 49, Herbert Smith\'s approach was not materially affected even in later 1995 and early 1996 or why no claim to avoid any of the insurances was then made .
In fact, it emerged during Mr Bakes\'s evidence that his witness statement had been prepared without reference to significant documentation on Herbert Smith\'s files coming into existence in the period immediately after my previous judgment .
This privileged material was made available during the present trial as a result of an application by Royal Hotel on the basis that there had been a waiver of privilege by insurers in adducing Mr Bakes\'s evidence .
Among other passages, a letter from Mr Bakes to Mr Carter dated 31st July 1996 contained this; "In short our case on affirmation and/or estoppel is that both these matters depend upon the party alleged to have affirmed or be estopped having full knowledge of the facts .
Until service of the further and better particulars in late 1994 we did not have the requisite knowledge .
From that time as you know, it has been recognized that the point might be available to be taken .
The judgment that was rightly exercised at that stage was that to take the point at that time might have a disastrous impact on the allegations of fraud and would put that case in jeopardy .
In any event it did not appear that any steps were to be taken (and were in fact taken) before the trial and determination of the fraud action which would amount to an act of affirmation of the material damage policy .
In summary therefore I do not consider that any affirmation/estoppel case advanced by the insured should succeed. .
The phrase "from that time as you know" was explained by Mr Bakes as referring to his discussion with Mr Carter in early 1996 about Herbert Smith\'s thinking in November 1994 .
Mr Bakes could not at first help, without a great deal of speculation, as to "whose judgment rightly exercised by whom" was meant in the next sentence, but he later accepted that it was the judgment of the three partners of Herbert Smith in November 1994 .
So read, and I do not doubt that it is so to be read, the sentence strikes an oddly emphatic note of justification .
The sentiment that it expresses, that it could have had "a disastrous effect" and put the fraud case "in jeopardy" also strikes one as an odd and very extreme view of insurers\' or any litigant\'s prospects of obtaining an objective resolution of plainly arguable disputes before a judge of this court .
The discrepancy between paragraphs 47-49 of the statement and the letter dated 31st July 1996 led Miss Bucknall to put to Mr Bakes that neither explanation was correct .
She suggested that the reality was that the three Herbert Smith partners had been motivated not to carry any avoidance defence further in November 1994 by embarrassment at not spotting it before the payment made in respect of the material damage policy in June 1994; the letter dated 31st July 1996 was to attempt to justify that step as a positive tactical decision;  the  witness statement was an inaccurate attempt to meet the defence of affirmation on a different basis, namely that Herbert Smith\'s state of knowledge had not been sufficient to require any choice .
In final submissions, Ms Bucknall did not pursue the first suggestion, and submitted that the right conclusion on the material before the court was simply that there had been a tactical decision as indicated in the letter .
Mr Bakes denied the first suggestion, and denied that his witness statement and letter were inconsistent .
He said that it was just an oversight or pure omission that he had not mentioned the tactical aspect in his witness statement .
What had happened, he said, was that, very much towards the end of a short discussion along the lines of paragraphs 47-48, someone had said words to the effect: "Besides which tactically the right thing to do is to await the outcome of the fraud action", and that "there was a sense that actually as a matter of efficiently conducting this matter we should dispose of the fraud action because otherwise there would be a sense of wasting the court\'s time with lots of pleading and so on and lengthening the original trial" .
That itself is, however, in my view a rather different "case management" point to the suggestions of "disastrous impact" and "jeopardy" made in the letter .
The explanations given in Mr Bakes\'s witness statement dated 17th January 1997 and in his letter dated 31st July 1996 are, in my judgment, inconsistent .
The former could not and would not have been formulated as it was, had Mr Bakes had any recollection of what he had written so emphatically and recently less than six months before .
The difference is the more striking, when one looks back at the affidavit of Mr Bakes sworn 27th September 1996 in relation to an application by insurers for summary judgment in the present action .
To that affidavit Mr Bakes first produced his copy of the particulars annotated "Moral hazard" .
He recalled the discussion with Mr Higgins and Ms Kydd in November 1994, and said that they had been concerned about the reliability of the information produced by Royal Hotel and had concluded (a) that they would only have all the relevant facts after judgment in the 1994 action and (b) that the right course would be to wait until then before deciding whether or not to assert non-disclosure in respect of the material damage policy,   The affidavit continued: "We decided that we were not in a position to amend the pleadings in the 1994 action, in relation to the business interruption policy. .
In relation to the amendment in late 1995/early 1996 of the statement of claim in the 1994 action, the affidavit said that the dishonest creation of the charges to Consolidator was pleaded simply as a particular from which fraud in the presentation of the business interruption claim could be inferred, the date of the fraud on bankers was not pleaded and Herbert Smith and insurers remained "perplexed as to what precisely was RHL\'s case in respect of the Consolidator invoices, and for what services they had been raised" .
It said that from the commencement of the trial of the 1994 action "it seemed sensible to wait until [the Judge] had decided one way or the other as to the true facts before the insurers decided to allege material non-disclosure in respect of the material damage policy" .
Again, no doubt, this affidavit was prepared without reference to and without having in mind the documents and account on Herbert Smith\'s file dating from July 1996 .
In my judgment, awareness of the issues which were bound to arise and have indeed arisen in this litigation has had a strong sub-conscious effect in shaping this evidence .
In the light of the documentation, the oral evidence and cross-examination and the inherent probabilities, I find myself unable to place any real reliance on what is said in the witness statement in relation to the thought processes which determined the attitude adopted in and after November 1994 .
I also consider it probable that the descriptions given of the state of mind of those directing the litigation at previous dates portray a greater incomprehension and uncertainty that is likely to have been the case .
Putting aside hindsight, it seems to me that on any objective view every successive development during the course of 1993 and 1994 reinforced the cause, first for suspicion, then for belief and finally for assurance that the Consolidator charges were both fictitious and dishonestly prepared, despite Royal Hotel\'s denials .
Mr Bakes\'s witness statement made no reference at all to any significance which moral hazard might have had in terms of the business interruption policy, under which insurers were already seeking to forfeit all benefit on the grounds of fraudulent claim, or to any discussion in that regard .
On any objective view, any moral hazard represented by dishonest preparation of invoices to mislead bankers about the hotel\'s trading would have been more directly material to the business interruption policy than to a material damage policy .
Mr Bakes\'s affidavit sworn in the Order 14 application is of interest in confirming what one would expect, namely that avoidance of the business interruption policy on this ground was considered in November 1994 .
But its suggestion that the partners in Herbert Smith then "decided that we were not in a position to amend the pleadings in the 1994 action, in relation to the business interruption policy" cannot be correct .
Mr Bakes, when recalled to give evidence about the thinking in November 1994 with regard to the business interruption policy, suggested that they "did not focus on [that] policy because we were already engaged in the fraud proceedings which related to that policy" .
But an additional way of justifying an existing avoidance of liability would be something on which one would have expected them to focus, rather than not to focus .
The key to Herbert Smith\'s thinking is in my view probably to be found in later answers by Mr Bakes, in which he accepted that part of the thinking was that they really had good enough defences - a "good, clear argument" - to be happy to go to trial on the business interruption policy, without developing a variant .
In theory, a case based on non-disclosure would have offered a more direct route to avoidance of all liability .
But it would obviously have lacked the compelling forensic attraction of the existing defence based on fraud in the presentation of the very insurance claim which Royal Hotel was pursuing .
It is the sort of alternative defence which legal advisers might prefer not to be seeking to introduce by way  of  amendment because it would complicate matters and/or possibly also for fear of giving a wrong signal .
There can be no real doubt but that the primary commercial and legal concern in November 1994 must have been the current litigation to forfeit benefit under the business interruption policy .
The material damage award had left insurers dissatisfied, but it had been paid .
This was certainly Mr Carter\'s attitude when, a year later, the possibility of avoidance of the material damage policy was first discussed with him by Mr Higgins .
He was "very cool" towards the suggestion, because they had already paid .
Further, the material damage policy was until February 1996 only mentioned in the points of counterclaim in the 1994 action in the context of the counterclaim for conspiracy; all the same, it would hardly have been practicable to have sought to supplement the existing forfeiture by avoidance of the business interruption policy for moral hazard, without at the same time either avoiding the material damage policy or, if there was no such avoidance, gravely prejudicing any future attempt to avoid it .
Mr Bakes did not think that the matter was thought through in quite that way; the focus, he said, was very much on the material damage policy "so I do not recall consciously going through that thought process" .
It seems to me that it would be surprising if it did not play a part, consciously or instinctively, in the thinking of the highly experienced litigators handling and discussing this matter in November 1994 and subsequently .
The decision in November 1994 However that may be, I am satisfied that an essentially tactical decision was taken and maintained in and after November 1994, to concentrate on the existing litigation and issues, and not to expand them by a claim to avoid either policy on grounds of moral hazard .
I think it unlikely that Mr Bakes\'s letter dated 31st July  1996  correctly explains the thinking behind this tactical decision .
It is more likely that it was a litigators\' decision to concentrate on the claim in hand, and on the central and solid issues which it raised about which Herbert Smith were already confident .
Insurers were not looking to Herbert Smith to do more than win that case .
Once it was won, the material damage policy could be revisited without diversion of energy to matters which Herbert Smith and their clients did not then regard as being of primary concern, and without any risk of giving any sign of weakness to anyone .
If, after a successful outcome of the business interruption action, steps could be taken which offered the prospect by litigation or compromise of some recoupment of monies in relation to the material damage policy, that would be pure benefit without any real downside .
This thinking was it appears encouraged by the belief, reflected in Mr Bakes\'s letter dated 31st July 1996, that it would be possible to avoid any step which could be taken as an unequivocal affirmation by insurers .
Knowledge I do not accept that the decision not to raise moral hazard in relation to the material damage policy in and after November 1994 was because of any scruples or uncertainties about the facts or about the basis for avoidance on this ground .
In my judgment, if Herbert Smith had considered that it was in their clients\' interests to raise moral hazard then or at any time thereafter, they would have raised it without hesitation and their clients would have accepted their advice and have acted accordingly .
Further, not only could and would the point have been pleaded, but Herbert Smith in my judgment had, for the purposes of affirmation, the requisite knowledge that there had been dishonesty in the preparation of invoices to mislead bankers at all material times in and after November 1994 .
Mr Bakes himself came close to admitting as much when he wrote his letter dated 31st July 1996, though I would reach the same conclusions about knowledge independently of that letter .
I find not only that Herbert Smith believed and on strong grounds that there had been such dishonesty, but that they did for present purposes "know" the real position, however much Royal Hotel continued to brazen it out with implausible denials or evasions .
The particulars served in November 1994 represented in fact the final demolition of any idea that the Consolidator invoices could have been honestly prepared .
Their devastating precision in identifying and billing particular hotel room usage was wholly and obviously undermined by the confirmation that the only accommodation which it could be suggested that workmen had actually utilized was staff accommodation in guest houses, etc .
elsewhere, and that the \xc2\xa3150,000 was based on nothing more than the hotel\'s income requirements .
Mr Bakes was referred in re-examination to KPMG\'s apparent continuing support of the Consolidator invoices and to Mrs Farnon\'s statement dated 18th May 1995 basing this on representations from Mr McHugh, recorded, as Mr Bakes understood, in and on Consolidator\'s letter dated 11th February 1993 .
On the very face of these documents, Mr McHugh had deceived Mrs Farnon (in particular by telling her in February 1993 that the invoices related to rooms  at the hotel  allocated to associated companies for workers mainly doing up Havilland Hall and advisers on other projects), which is what I also ultimately held despite subsequent attempts by Mr McHugh to explain away the obvious .
Mr Bakes said that Mr McHugh\'s explanations in paragraphs 18-19 of his witness statement of 22nd May 1995 left him "in a genuine state of not understanding what had been going on here" .
This contrasts not only with a submission by Lord Irvine during the proceedings for summary judgment that paragraph 19 of Mr McHugh\'s statement was a "giveaway" which caused Herbert Smith to put two and two together and led to the November 1995 pleading, but also with Mr Bakes\'s subsequent statement in his witness statement that paragraph 19 "reinforced my feeling that any deception might well have been intended to affect Royal Hotel\'s bankers" .
In reality, I consider, once the particulars had been reviewed in November 1994, Herbert Smith was aware and for present purposes knew that the only purpose of the elaborate and palpably false invoices to Consolidator must have been to mislead and, in particular, to mislead persons such as bankers reviewing the hotel\'s trading and that Mr McHugh on behalf of Royal Hotel must have caused them to be brought them into existence for that dishonest purpose .
The unusual feature of the present case is the conclusion that insurers had, for the purpose of affirmation, knowledge of dishonest conduct by their insured, which their insured was in continuing litigation denying .
That denial, although an important factor to be taken into account, does not preclude a conclusion that insurers had the relevant knowledge and knew that Royal Hotel\'s denial was in truth unsustainable .
For insurers to have had a choice whether or not to affirm the material damage insurance, Royal Hotel\'s dishonest conduct must have been material and have induced insurers\' renewal of the insurance and they or their legal advisers must have known this and that it gave them the right to avoid .
Fan Atlantic  was decided on 25th July 1994 and its effect was no doubt well known to insurance specialists like Herbert Smith .
In their submissions before me, insurers did not at any point suggest that any of these requirements represented any obstacle to Royal Hotel .
It is true that Herbert Smith did not go into the position with their clients in any detail until after my judgment in July 1996 .
That was due to their tactical decision not to advance any case of avoidance based on moral hazard in any context until the 1994 action had been brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
It also corresponded with Mr Carter\'s instinctive reaction in late 1995 not to become involved in any avoidance of the material damage policy at that stage .
I have no real doubt, however, that Herbert Smith considered the dishonest conduct to be, on the face of it, material and knowledge of it to be, on the face of it, something that would have precluded insurers from renewing the risk in October 1991 on the same or any terms .
Is it fatal to affirmation that Herbert Smith decided for tactical reasons not to pursue any moral hazard point at that stage and so did not actually address these points with their insurer clients .
Or that, once it was drawn to Mr Carter\'s attention in late 1995 that the moral hazard point was there to pursue, he accepted that it should be left until after judgment in the 1994 action .
I do not consider that it is .
A person who deliberately and for tactical reasons decides not to acquire definite knowledge of a matter which he believes it likely that he could confirm must be treated as having knowledge of that matter .
This is not to introduce any conception of constructive knowledge or negligence into the present situation .
It reflects Herbert Smith\'s awareness of the point and the deliberate nature of the tactical decision which they took for better or worse not to raise or pursue it at that stage, however good it was in fact and law .
They were in effect prepared to take the risk of the position being whatever it was, and it should be treated as within their knowledge accordingly .
Mr Carter was, it appears, ready to adopt a similar attitude, although the way in which the matter was put to him and the extent to which he focused on it are unclear .
It seems likely that it was for these reasons that insurers did not in their evidence or submissions before me focus on the fact that materiality and inducement were not considered or confirmed with insurers or any expert until after my judgment .
Unequivocal act Royal Hotel\'s case is that there were unequivocal acts by insurers as follows: (1) payment of sums under the material damage policy in June 1994; (2) conduct in treating the policy and/or awards under it as valid and enforceable, consisting in particular of (i) the prosecution of the 1994 action and defence to the counterclaim in it, (ii) the sequence of events leading to the second interim award under the material damage policy and (iii) the subsequent correspondence between parties with a view to agreeing the costs due under that award .
Royal Hotel now seeks to add (iv) "the consent order dated 24th July 1996 in the 1994 action, pursuant to which the balance of the material damage award was paid by [insurers]" .
As to (1), payment in June 1994, it was not until November 1994, when the particulars confirmed the dishonesty of the Consolidator invoices, that moral hazard occurred to Herbert Smith as a basis for avoidance .
It is irrelevant to consider whether the point could - or should - have occurred to Herbert Smith earlier, since it did not and constructive knowledge has no part in affirmation .
As to (2), the original counterclaim in the 1994 action was for conspiracy in respect of both policies, with breach of the agreement to pay \xc2\xa31 million under the material damage policy appearing as a particular of conspiracy .
The damage alleged consisted of loss suffered by delay due to the conspiracy in expeditious payment of claims under both policies .
It would have been an answer to a claim for such damages (although, it may well be, not to the allegation of conspiracy itself) that the material damage policy had been avoided .
The defence to counterclaim served 29th April 1994 pleaded: "7 .
It is denied that Royal Hotel suffered any loss and damage by reason of the matters pleaded in the Counterclaim .
The dispute between the Royal Hotel and Royal and/or ICCI as to the extent of the liability of Royal and/or ICCI under the policies was referred to arbitration and Royal Hotel will be compensated in respect of any loss suffered by an award of interest in that arbitration. .
The course of arbitration in respect of the business interruption claim had been halted by the claimed (and effective) forfeiture of all benefit under that policy .
Paragraph 7 of the defence to counterclaim remained unaltered at all times .
Further, Herbert Smith\'s letter dated 12th October 1994 involved a recognition of the validity of Sir Patrick Neill\'s first award under the material damage policy, of his continuing jurisdiction and  so  by necessary implication of the continuing validity of the material damage award, since his jurisdiction was predicated on liability being admitted (as insurers themselves had successfully persuaded him in February 1994, with the result that no actual business interruption award was ever issued) .
It seems unlikely (although Mr Bakes was not asked by either side about this) that it was simply coincidence that after the November 1994 particulars Herbert Smith failed to respond to Sir Patrick\'s requests for clarification of their position on a second interim award on costs .
Mr Bakes acknowledged that a year later he was seeking to "string [Royal Hotel] along" in correspondence on costs in the hope of avoiding any step which might be construed as an affirmation .
However, in the context of a continuing arbitration, silence is not necessarily equivocal .
In the present case, it led to Sir Patrick issuing his second interim award dated 13th April 1995 .
A party to an arbitration who, with knowledge that he has a right to avoid, allows further performance by the arbitrator of the tri-partite arbitration contract between the parties and the arbitrator, whose decision will give rise to enforceable rights and duties between the parties, may in my view be taken to recognize unequivocally by his conduct the continuing applicability of the arbitration agreement and, in the present context, the continuing validity of the insurance policy upon which its applicability was predicated .
He owes a duty  to  speak and to prevent or at least dissent from further performance, if his conduct is not to be so construed .
This brings me to insurers\' conduct in late 1995 in seeking documentation to enable them to consider Royal Hotel\'s suggestion that the costs awarded under the second interim award be agreed without taxation .
Taken in conjunction with the earlier conduct which I have identified, this underlines my conclusion that insurers by their conduct recognized unequivocally the validity of that award and of the material damage policy .
If it had stood alone, however, I would doubt whether it was a sufficiently unequivocal recognition of such validity; for example, although consistent with such a recognition, it might alternatively have been attributable to a desire to have full information about the financial position, before deciding whether or not to avoid the material damage policy .
In January and February 1996 amended and re-amended points of counterclaim in the 1994 action first introduced and then developed Royal Hotel\'s assertions of breaches of the two policies as independent claims: see paragraph 38 .
The reamendment for which I gave leave at the outset of the trial added a specific claim for bank charges and interest as damages for breach of the agreement to pay \xc2\xa31 million under the material damage policy .
The action was fought on that basis, and I held that insurers were in breach of a contract made by their loss adjusters on their behalf whereby it had been agreed to make an interim payment of \xc2\xa31,000,000 to Royal Hotel in respect of the material damage policy .
I ordered damages to be assessed in respect of that breach .
In practice, this assessment has not been pursued, quite possibly because the award of interest in the material damage arbitration covered the same period .
Nonetheless, the trial was fought before me in terms which recognized the existence of the material damage policy .
If that policy had been avoided, the agreement by the loss adjusters to make the interim payment would have been vulnerable .
Its underlying assumption was the existence and validity of the material damage insurance .
Whether avoidance of the material damage policy would have made the agreement to make the interim payment under the material damage policy void or voidable may be a nice point, which was not addressed by submissions before me .
An agreement to make an interim payment under a policy appears, if anything, even more obviously dependant on the validity of that policy than the agreement to compromise a claim in ignorance of right to avoid considered in  Magee v. Pennine Insurance Co. Ltd.  [1969] 2 Q.B .
507, (where it did not matter whether the agreement was void or voidable and the majority judgments are open to different interpretations) .
I am inclined to think that the agreement to make the interim payment would have fallen away automatically with avoidance of the material damage policy .
On this limited basis and more generally because the 1994 action was, to outward appearances, conducted throughout in terms which assumed the existence and validity of the material damage policy, it seems to me that, whatever was intended, insurers\' conduct of the 1994 action is also capable of constituting an unequivocal representation as to the validity of the material damage policy .
The unusual feature that Royal Hotel was itself denying any dishonest conduct in the course of the 1994 action makes it necessary to focus more closely on the requirement that the conduct relied on as affirmation constituted a sufficiently unequivocal representation of choice .
Insurers themselves had, I have concluded, the requisite knowledge from November 1994 .
Royal Hotel was throughout denying any dishonesty, but it must have known that its denial was untruthful and may very well have had a shrewd appreciation that the denial was not making any impact on insurers .
But Royal Hotel\'s own state of mind is not the test .
The test is whether a reasonable person, in Royal Hotel\'s position and with its knowledge, would have regarded insurers as making an unequivocal representation or choice .
That depends upon what a reasonable person could and would infer about insurers\' knowledge .
Insurers\' own actual knowledge derived from a common sense consideration of documents and information which Royal Hotel had supplied .
Although Royal Hotel continued to brazen it out, it seems to me that a reasonable person would have reached exactly the same conclusion that Herbert Smith reached, namely that these were dishonest and fictitious invoices deliberately created by Mr McHugh to distort the hotel\'s trading in the eyes of persons such as bankers .
In these circumstances, I consider that the conduct which I have identified did constitute affirmation, in particular (a) insurers\' and their advisers\' conduct in late 1994 and early 1995 in relation to the second interim award on costs and (b) their conduct of the 1994 action, especially after the amendment and reamendment of the points of counterclaim to claim damages directly for breach of the agreement made under the material damage policy .
I need say relatively little about the further step which Miss Bucknall sought to plead as affirmation, the consent order dated 24th July 1996 .
Mr Veeder resisted its admission into the action on the grounds that it was far too late, incomprehensible and, so far as it could be understood, hopeless .
The order dated 24th July 1996 discharged paragraph 4 of a previous order dated 28th July 1994 .
That order dated 28th July 1994 had by paragraph 3 restrained Royal Hotel from enforcing the material damage award as to \xc2\xa3950,000 (of its total of nearly \xc2\xa35 million) until trial of the 1994 action or further order .
By paragraph 4 it had ordered insurers to pay \xc2\xa3950,000 into an account in the parties\' solicitors\' joint names .
The conceptual basis of this order is not, I think, free from doubt .
The general idea was that since Royal Hotel had received \xc2\xa3950,000 on account under the business interruption policy, they should not receive the full amount of the material damage award pending the outcome of the 1994 action .
What in law was the basis for or effect of paragraphs 3 and 4 is less clear .
It was apparently accepted that the \xc2\xa3950,000 (allegedly) paid and recoverable in respect of the business interruption policy could not be set off in extinction of the undisputed debt on the material damage award .
But, if the full amount of the material damage award had had to be paid over, insurers might have obtained Mareva relief in relation to the \xc2\xa3950,000 being reclaimed on the business interruption policy .
The order, on whatever basis, short-circuited matters .
In early 1996, by way of variation of the order, \xc2\xa3475,000 was allowed to be paid out of the joint bank account .
Paragraph 4 was discharged by the order dated 24th July 1996, which ordered the balance remaining in the joint account (some \xc2\xa3571,000 by that date) to be paid out to insurers in part satisfaction  of  my judgment in favour of insurers for return of the \xc2\xa3950,000 paid to Royal Hotel on account under the business interruption policy .
If this summary is right, insurers were simply recovering monies which they were due from one source or another under the business interruption policy .
It was as if the monies had been paid over to Royal Hotel, maraeva-ed in their hands and were now the subject of execution to satisfy the business interruption judgment .
The variation said nothing about the legitimacy of Royal Hotel continuing to hold the \xc2\xa3950,000 originally paid under the business interruption policy .
It said nothing to suggest or confirm that those monies could now be applied to meet the balance of the material damage award .
The variation cannot have constituted an act of affirmation .
Accordingly, assuming that I have understood the position correctly (and Miss Bucknall did not, I think, suggest the contrary), the amendment sought is bound to fail and should not be granted .
If it is suggested that my understanding of the position is not correct, then it seems to me that it would be necessary to clarify the position by proper pleading, proof and explanation of the various orders .
It is too late to undertake this by an amendment suggested for the first time in counsel\'s final submissions, and I would have refused leave on this ground .
As it, however, Royal Hotel do not in any event need to rely on it .
Conclusion It  follows that insurers\' action fails on the ground that insurers affirmed the material damage policy, despite their and legal advisers\' unannounced internal intention not to do so .
(D) CAUSE OF ACTION OR ISSUE ESTOPPEL AND/OR ABUSE OF PROCESS  Miss Bucknall\'s short point is that insurers should have raised any case based on avoidance of the material damage policy, or for that matter the business interruption policy, in the 1994 action, if they wanted to do so at all .
They are, she submitted precluded on grounds of estoppel or abuse of process from doing so subsequently .
This point was argued before me on the basis that, if it was otherwise well founded, it would be open to me to give effect to it as a defence in so far as it involves a defence or as a ground for striking out the action if and in so far as that is the appropriate remedy in a case of abuse of process .
The primary basis for Miss Bucknall\'s submission is the statement of principle by Wigram V-C in  Henderson v. Henderson  (1843) 3 Hare 100, 114: "... where a given matter becomes the subject of litigation in, and of adjudication by, a court of competent jurisdiction, the court requires the parties to that litigation to bring forward their whole case, and will not (except under special circumstances) permit the same parties to open the same subject of litigation in respect of matter which might have been brought forward as part of the subject in contest, but which was not brought forward, only because they have, from negligence, inadvertence, or even accident, omitted part of their case .
The plea of res judicata applies, except in special cases, not only to points upon which the court was actually required by the parties to form an opinion and pronounce a judgment, but to every point which properly belonged to the subject of litigation, and which the parties, exercising reasonable diligence, might have brought forward at the time. .
This was examined and explained in the Privy Council in  Yat Tung Co. v. Dao Heng Bank  [1975] AC 581 , 590-1, where Lord Kilbrandon said: "The shutting out of a "subject of litigation" - a power which no court should exercise but after a scrupulous examination of all the circumstances - is limited to cases where reasonable diligence would have caused a matter to be earlier raised; moreover, although negligence, inadvertence, or even accident will not suffice to excuse, nevertheless "special circumstances" are reserved in case justice should be found to require the non-application of the rule .
For example, if it had been suggested that when the counterclaim in no .
969 came to be answered Mr. Lai was unaware, and could not reasonably have been expected to be aware, of the circumstances attending the sale to Choi Kee, it may be that the present plea against him would not have been maintainable .
But no such averment has been made .
The Vice-Chancellor\'s phrase "every point which properly belonged to the subject of litigation" was expanded in  Greenhalgh  v.  Mallard  [1947] 2 All E.R .
255, 257, by Somervell L.J .
: "... res judicata for this purpose is not confined to the issues which the court is actually asked to decide, but... it covers issues or facts which are so clearly part of the subject matter of the litigation and so clearly could have been raised that it would be an abuse of the process of the court to allow a new proceeding to be started in respect of them." .
The terminology used is not entirely consistent .
For the most part, the entire topic is dealt with under the general rubic of  res judicata  or  issue estoppel .
In some cases, however, emphasis is laid on the different conceptual basis of  abuse of process  on which rests, as stated in  Yat Tung  at p.590A-B, "the wider sense in which the doctrine can be appealed to" .
In  Brisbane  C.C .
v. A-G for Queensland   [1979] AC 411 , 425G, this was again identified as the true basis for the wider jurisdiction, which the Privy Council there said "ought only to be applied where the facts are such as to constitute an abuse: otherwise there is a danger of a party being shut out from bringing forward a genuine subject of litigation" .
Chitty on Contracts (27th Ed. .
Vol .
1, paragraph 25-011 adopts a different approach, treating both aspects of  Henderson v. Henderson  under the rubric of cause of action or issue estoppel, but identifying with reference to this and other authorities a third head of jurisdiction under the rules of court and inherent jurisdiction, to stay or dismiss an action by which a plaintiff seeks to raise matters which were or should have been litigated in earlier proceedings .
It seems to me, in the light of  Yat Tung  and  Brisbane C.C .
v. A-G for Queensland  that it is more correct to analyse the matter under only two heads .
Valuable discussions of the nature and scope of the jurisdiction under both heads are found in other authorities cited in Chitty, such as  Dallal v. Bank Mellat  [1986] 1 Q.B .
441 (Hobhouse J. .
and  Talbot v. Berkshire C.C .
[1994] 1 Q.B .
290 (C.A .
), 296, 301 .
There is a considerable overlap in the facts relevant to this point and to affirmation .
The legal tests are different .
Estoppel or abuse does not depend on either knowledge or a manifested election, but upon the existence of a point "properly belonging to the subject of litigation" which might "with reasonable diligence" have been brought forward in it .
The test is also subject to "special circumstances" .
The relevant parties before me were parties to the 1994 litigation .
The judgment in that action is final and conclusive on the merits of the matters decided .
But the validity of the material damage policy was not in issue in the 1994 action .
The first head of jurisdiction identified in the authorities,  res judicata  or  issue estoppel  in the narrow sense, is not available .
The wider head of jurisdiction requires consideration whether insurers could and should have put the voidability of the material damage policy in issue in the 1994 action, and should be held precluded from doing so in the present fresh action .
Insurers could without doubt have claimed to avoid the material damage policy, and have resisted liability for the damages claimed for conspiracy and for the alleged breaches of (inter alia) the material damage policy on that basis .
They could have avoided the material damage policy by defence or amended defence to the original (or amended or reamended) points of counterclaim .
Irrespective whether they had sufficient knowledge for the purposes of affirmation, they certainly had sufficient knowledge for the present purpose in and from November 1994 .
Their decision not to do so was, as I have found, a tactical decision .
This is exactly the sort of context in which the wider principle in  Henderson v. Henderson  may apply .
Two objections to this conclusion arise .
The first is that the wider principle in  Henderson v. Henderson  can only apply when there has been a decision in the prior proceedings adverse to the party now seeking to pursue further litigation: see The Doctrine of Res Judicata by Spencer Bower (2nd Ed., 1969) paragraphs 197 and 203 .
This qualification inter-relates with the rule, mentioned in Chitty paragraph 25-010, that cause of action and issue estoppel only apply to issues which it was "necessary to determine" for the purpose of resolving the previous proceedings .
Issues which a court may in passing have decided or assumed against a party but in respect of which he could not  ex hypothesi  appeal (either because he succeeded in the action on other grounds or because he would have lost anyway on other grounds) are likely on this basis to fall outside  Henderson v, Henderson , The requirement of an adverse decision, on the particular issue and on the action as a whole, cannot however be absolute .
For example, under the narrower principle in  Henderson v. Henderson , a party who sued on a contract and recovered judgment in his favour for damages could be precluded from later asserting that the contract was void .
The principle was so stated by Lord Denning M.R .
in  Fidelitas Shipping  Co.  Ltd. v. V/O Exportchleb  [1966] 1 Q.B .
630, 640 .
Under the wider principle, based on abuse of process, it is also not clear to me why there should be the completely rigid restriction on the court\'s jurisdiction indicated in Spencer Bower and in the older authorities there cited .
I note that in  re State of Norway\'s Application  [1990] 1 A.C. 723, 752, Balcombe L.J .
expressed the view that appealability on the particular issue was no more than a test to decide whether a particular issue was fundamental to the court\'s substantive decision .
These points were not argued before me, and I do no more than draw attention to them .
For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that my judgment in the 1994 action was adverse to insurers on the issue whether ICCI was in breach of the contract to pay \xc2\xa31 million under the material damage policy and in adjudicating that ICCI was liable to pay damages to be assessed for that breach .
That conclusion could not have been reached unless the material damage policy continued in force .
The other objection is that it is erroneous to treat an issue about avoidance which could only arise as and when insurers chose to avoid, as a "defence" or as an issue which could or should have been raised in the 1994 action at all .
No such issue arose  (it is  submitted) until insurers elected to avoid on 12th August 1996 .
Unless before that date they had affirmed (or had precluded themselves from avoiding by promissory estoppel, which has not been suggested), it remained open to them on 12th August 1996 to avoid .
Accordingly, it is said, insurers must in this case either succeed on affirmation or not at all .
In short, the principles in  Henderson v. Henderson  do not extend to, and should not be interpreted to restrict, a party\'s contractual or equitable rights, particularly to avoid .
They apply simply to the timely bringing forward, as a matter of procedure, of claims or defences based on existing rights, immunities and facts .
This second objection raises another point of general interest .
Miss Bucknall helpfully located, and Mr Veeder relied upon, a decision of the Court of Appeal in  Duchess Theatre Company Ltd. v. Lord  (9th December 1993 .
In that case Minories Finance Ltd. (formerly Johnson Mathey Bankers Ltd. - "JMB") claimed by writ issued in October 1991 in respect of monies of which they had on 25th February 1996 demanded payment from various companies in the Gomba group as guarantors of Gomba Exim Ltd .
Previously, in mid-1995, JMB had demanded payment from the same companies of various other monies due from them as principal debtors or as guarantors of companies other than Gomba Exim Ltd., and judgments were given against such companies in respect of those monies on 16th January 1996 .
It was argued in the 1991 action that JMB was precluded under the wider principle in  Henderson v. Henderson  from pursuing the claims made in the 1991 action, since they could with reasonable diligence have been made in the 1985-86 proceedings .
The argument failed .
Under the terms of the Gomba Exim guarantees, no cause of action arose against the companies unless and until a demand was made, and no demand was made until 25th February 1986 - that is, after the previous judgments .
Balcombe L.J., with whom the other members of the court agreed, held that, even if the demand had preceded the proceedings which led to the judgments of 16th January 1996, still the causes of action thereby created would not have been so clearly part of the subject matter of those actions that it would be an abuse of the process of the court to allow a new action to be started in respect of them .
He went on that the fact that there were no causes of action at all until 25th February 1986 made the matter even clearer, since: "It would in my judgment be an unwarranted extension of the doctrine of  Henderson v. Henderson , even if it were otherwise applicable, to apply it to a case where no cause of action existed at the relevant date but which might then have existed had JMB made the necessary demands on the plaintiffs. .
This reasoning lends obvious support to insurers\' submission before me that  Henderson v, Henderson  has no application to a situation where there was no avoidance and no right to reclaim sums paid under the material damage policy until 12th August 1996 .
It was however delivered in a case where there was no real connection between the subject-matters of the different proceedings .
Further, the position of a person who may, if and when he chooses to make a demand, acquire a cause of action in debt or for damages is not necessarily analogous for present purposes to that of a party to a voidable contract with a right to avoid .
The former may make such a demand at any time .
The latter is anyway subject to certain restrictions, arising from the possibility of affirmation as well as promissory estoppel .
The Privy Council decision in  Yat Tung  presents an instructive contrast .
In the first action (no.969), the appellant, Yat Tung, had claimed that an apparent mortgage to secure a loan to it was a sham and that it held the property as trustee for the bank, Dao Heng .
Dao Heng counterclaimed for loss suffered by it on exercise by it of a power of sale contained in the mortgage, by virtue of which it sold the property to Choi Kee .
In response to the counterclaim Yat Tung admitted the sale to Choi Kee, but denied that it owed any sum or that the bank had suffered any loss .
Yat Tung lost both the claim and the counterclaim .
In the second action (no.534), Yat Tung claimed against both the bank and Choi Kee that the sale was void or voidable as fraudulent in that both had, in effect, been conspiring to obtain the property at a gross undervalue .
The issue was "whether the allegation of fraud and voidability of the sale to Choi Kee were matters available for litigation in [action no. .
969": see page 5S8D .
I observe, in parenthesis, that this formulation reflects what I would perceive to have been the position in law, namely that, if Yat Tung\'s allegations were well founded, they would have made the sale voidable, not void .
The rules would have enabled such an issue to be raised by counterclaim to the counterclaim .
That being so, the Privy Council applied  Henderson v. Henderson  in its wider aspect .
Following passages which I have already quoted, its advice went on: "Again a phrase used by Lord Shaw of Dumferline in delivering the opinion of the Board in  Hoystead  v.  Commissioner of Taxation  [1926] AC 155 , 171, "the present point was one which, if taken, went to the root of the matter on the prior occasion", appears precisely apposite to the failure, in answer to the counterclaim in No .
969, to raise the matters founded on in no .
534 which, if then substantiated, would have been then decisive. .
This authority appears therefore to favour the view that there may be circumstances, in which a party who fails to take advantage of a right to avoid (of which he knew or ought to have known) in order to defeat a claim under or by reference to a contract, may be precluded from later doing so .
Such an avoidance may be effected in and by the same pleading that raises it as an issue in the action .
Although in a strict sense, a party has no defence unless and until he avoids, there is an element of unreality about this view of the matter .
As responses to a claim, avoidance, breach of warranty, failure to perform a condition precedent to liability or a suggestion of fraudulent claim are in the ordinary course all probably considered and, where arguable, either deployed or rejected in litigation, without attention to whether they depend on some formal act which has effect in contract or equity outside insurers\' pleading .
Avoidance for non-disclosure does depend on such an act .
Avoidance for breach of warranty now, on House of Lords authority,  Hellenic Mutual War Risks Association v. Bank of Nova Scotia  [1992] 2 A.C.233 (and contrary  to  what some commentators had previously suggested to be the law) does not .
Denial of liability for breach of condition precedent does not .
Forfeiture of benefit for fraud in the claims context under a specific policy provision does not .
But avoidance of liability at common law for fraud in the claims context may operate on a different legal basis, although the position is not clear: see my previous judgment, pages 133-4 .
Insurers\' insistence before me that avoidance for non-disclosure is a course which they can reserve for subsequent use without risk of application of the wider principle in  Henderson v, Henderson  does not appear to me to fit easily with the day-to-day realities of claims handling and litigation or with the basis of the wider principle in that case, namely to avoid abuse of the process of the court .
The Privy Council advice in  Yat Tung  appears to me to recognize that there are some situations where a party should be expected to make any case which he has on avoidance at the time when reliance is placed on the contract which he later suggests is voidable, and that failure to do so at that time may preclude him asserting avoidance in later proceedings .
I acknowledge that this involves a slight extension of the scope of  Henderson v. Henderson  into the field of exercise of substantive rights .
Such an extension in the particular context of voidability of insurance contracts appears to me to reflect the commercial and practical realities which apply between parties to litigation such as the 1994 action, where the insurance contracts had no continuing significance save in respect of claims already paid or being pursued under them .
I note, in passing, that in  Magee v. Pennine Insurance Co. Ltd.  .
Lord Denning, who regarded the compromise agreement as voidable not void, nonetheless spoke of Mr Magee as having no "no valid claim on the insurance policy" (page 515A) .
That usage reflects the same reality .
Apart from the claims which had been paid or were being pursued in respect of the material damage insurance policy, that policy had by the time of the 1994 action no significance for either party .
In my judgment, the principle extended in this way in potentially applicable in the present context .
Reliance was placed on the material damage policy in the counterclaims made by Royal Hotel against insurers in the 1994 action .
Insurers met that reliance by accepting the existence of the material damage policy, but by denying any liability, whether for conspiracy or for breach, in respect of it .
In one area, albeit minor, insurers lost on the case made against them of breach .
The effect of their present case would be to undermine that conclusion, as well as to enable them to recover the sums paid under the material damage policy, which they could on the face of it also have counterclaimed to the counterclaim in the 1994 action .
How the 1994 action would then have proceeded is a matter which cannot of course now be known for certain; but it would probably have been considered on the application for a split trial with which I in fact dealt with on 9th December 1994, as outlined on page 98 of my previous judgment, or at a later stage if the issue had been raised later .
There would in practice probably also have been a claim to avoid the business interruption policy .
The strong likelihood is that the issue of avoidance for non-disclosure, being relatively short and linked factually with the background issues in the 1994 action as well as the counterclaim, would have been tried and determined with all the other issues which I decided on 5th July 1996 .
There is in the circumstances no doubt that the issue of non-disclosure and avoidance could with reasonable diligence have been brought forward in the 1994 action .
Was it one which "properly belonged" to the previous action .
And, if it did, are there special circumstances which should lead to the non-application of the wider rule in  Henderson v. Henderson  .
The arguments on these two points overlap .
Mr Veeder submits that his clients were justified in viewing the counterclaim as substantially misconceived .
Any issues under the material damage policy were, he suggested, subsidiary, or, at all events, the only issue on which insurers lost was very subsidiary .
In these circumstances, any claim to avoid the material damage policy did not properly belong to the 1994 action, or there were special circumstances why the court should not hold insurers precluded from pursuing it, even though it would undermine a minor part of the previous judgment .
In my judgment, despite the tactical considerations which led Herbert Smith to the course which they and insurers took, any issue regarding the voidability of the material damage policy was so closely connected with the subject matter of the counterclaim that it did properly belong in the 1994 action .
It could and would have been accommodated there and, in all likelihood, tried together with the other issues which I determined in the 1994 action .
That the only issue depending upon the validity of the material damage policy upon which insurers lost was a subsidiary issue could be more directly important if insurers had sought to avoid that policy but had, after judgment, decided not to appeal on the issue because of its insignificance .
Here, however, there was a tactical decision not to take any point about the validity of the material damage policy in an action in which the defendants were counterclaiming on a relatively broad basis which assumed and depended in one way or another upon the validity of the material damage policy .
Although I have in mind the underlying basis of the wider principle in  Henderson v. Henderson  and the words of the Privy Council in  Brisbane C.C .
v. A-G for Queensland  .
I do  not  see this as a case where special circumstances exist taking the matter outside the scope of that principle .
The court need not be too sympathetic to a tactical decision to postpone avoidance, in circumstances where, to all outward appearances and so far as the court was aware, the validity of the material damage policy was and remained throughout the course of the 1994 action unchallenged - as Mr Bakes, on the basis of his attendance note dated 23rd July 1996, also believed that Royal Hotel itself thought was the case .
In these circumstances, although it may be rare that a decision not to avoid will fall within the wider principle of  Henderson v. Henderson  .
I consider that this is such a case .
The claim therefore fails on this ground also .
There will be judgment dismissing the claim against Royal Hotel .
29 July 1997  .
b'MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  There are before the court applications in two actions .
\t    In 1997 Folio No 1845 (the first action) between Gan Insurance Company Limited ("GAN") and Eagle Star Insurance Company Limited ("Eagle Star"), as first and second plaintiffs, and The Tai Ping Insurance Company Limited ("Tai Ping"), as defendant, Tai Ping applies pursuant to Order 12, rule 8(1) to discharge the order of Mance J of 4 September 1997 (which granted leave to serve out) and to set aside service of the writ on the grounds that the court has no jurisdiction in respect of the plaintiffs\' claims and/or that this was not a proper case for the grant of leave to serve the proceedings out of the jurisdiction .
\t    In 1997 Folio No 1846 (the second action) between Royal Reinsurance Company Limited ("Royal") and six other plaintiffs and Central Insurance Company Limited ("Central"), as defendant, Central applies pursuant to Order 12, rule 8 for an order that the order of Mance J dated 4 September 1997 (which granted leave to serve out) be set aside on the grounds that the contract between the plaintiffs and the defendant is not governed by English law; England is not the appropriate forum; England is not clearly and distinctly the most appropriate forum; and the case was and is not in all the circumstances a proper one for service out of the jurisdiction .
The Background \t    Central, who are a Taiwanese insurance company, participated as one of five insurers in an EAR policy reinsuring Winbond Electronics Corporation ("Winbond") in respect of the erection of a hi-tech semi-conductor wafer fabrication plant in Taiwan known as "FAB-III" .
Tai Ping were the lead insurers .
Tai Ping obtained facultative reinsurance of their line from among others GAN and Eagle Star .
Central obtained facultative reinsurance of their line from eight reinsurers on the slip, seven of whom are plaintiffs in the second action .
Of these the third, GAN, and the sixth, Eagle Star, are also reinsurers of the leaders Tai Ping (and plaintiffs in the first action) .
\t    On 14 October 1996 a fire occurred at FAB-III causing very substantial damage to various parts of the construction, including the clean room which housed some of the most sophisticated and expensive equipment .
This resulted in a claim by Winbond against their insurers, including Tai Ping and Central, for the cost of replacing and/or repair of damaged machinery and equipment in the sum of NT$3,774,115,979 .
\t    Tai Ping co-ordinated the handling of the claim on behalf of co-insurers .
Mr G R Purdon of GAB Robins, Taiwan, International Loss Adjusters, was instructed on behalf of the direct insurers .
Mr D A Robbins of Dr JH Burgoyne and Partners Limited, Singapore, consulting scientists and engineers, was instructed by GAB Robins to investigate the fire aspects on behalf of the direct insurers .
\t    The direct insurers purported to rescind the Winbond policy on the grounds of alleged breach of Endorsement 206 concerning the sufficiency of the FAB III fire protections and breach of Article 68 of the Taiwan Insurance Law .
Winbond commenced proceedings and, after negotiation, their claim was on 31 July 1997 settled by the co-insurers .
The settlement was in the global sum of NT$ 2,650,000,000 .
\t    The plaintiffs obtained leave to serve out of this jurisdiction ex parte on 4 September 1997 in both actions .
In the Points of Claim in both actions the plaintiffs claim (1) a declaration that the defendant is in breach of a Claims C-operation Clause, that compliance by the defendant with the requirements of such clause is a condition precedent to the plaintiffs\' liability to the defendant under the contract of reinsurance, and that the plaintiffs, by reason of the defendant\'s breach of the said clause, are not liable to the defendant in respect of the said loss; (2) alternatively a declaration that the plaintiffs are entitled to avoid and/or rescind the contract of facultative reinsurance with the defendant ab initio for material misrepresentation, and that the contract has been so avoided and/or rescinded .
\t    Leave to serve out was obtained on three grounds, found in Order 11, rule 1(1)(d):  \t\t"The claim is brought to enforce, rescind, dissolve annul or otherwise affect a contract, or to recover damages or obtain other relief in respect of the breach of a contract, being (in either case) a contract which --  \t\t\t(i) was made within the jurisdiction; or \t\t\t(ii) was made by or through an agent trading or residing within the jurisdiction on behalf of a principal trading or residing out of the jurisdiction; or  \t\t\t(iii) is by its terms, or by implication, governed by English law. .
It is common ground that the principles upon which leave to serve outside the jurisdiction is granted and as to discretion and forum conveniens are accurately summarised in the notes in the Supreme Court Practice 1997 at 11/1/16 and 11/1/17, subject in addition to the need to apply the principles set out in  New Hampshire v Phillips Electronics  (unreported, 16.5.97 CA) in relation to claims for negative declarations .
\t    The notes at 11/1/16 set out the principles upon which leave to serve outside the jurisdiction is granted: "The principles can be summarised as follows: 1 .
The case must fall within the rule .... 2 .
Standard of Proof \t\t\t(1)  Good arguable case: this is the degree of proof required by the court to show that the case falls within one of the sub-paragraphs of Order 11, rule 1(1) so as to give it jurisdiction to consider the application .... \t\t\t(2)  Serious issue to be tried once the court is satisfied that it has jurisdiction, which under some heads of rule 11(1) require an examination of the merits, this is the lower degree of proof required to enable it to exercise its discretion to grant leave, both as to merits (if not already decided to the higher standard under (1)) and forum conveniens.... \t\t\t(3)  Discretion .
The applicant must satisfy the Court that it is proper to exercise its discretion to grant leave; this is a second consequence of the requirement of rule 4(2) referred to above .
Moreover the court retains an inherent discretion to decline jurisdiction on grounds such as forum non conveniens or failure of the plaintiff to make out a good arguable case .
\t\tThe House of Lords has reviewed all the authorities on the matters to be taken into consideration by the court in exercising its discretion to grant leave to serve out of the jurisdiction and the standard of proof to be applied .
On such an application the Court must consider: (1) whether jurisdiction has been established on the criterion of good arguable case laid down in  Korner\'s  case .... under one of the paragraphs of rule 1(1) and (2) whether there is a serious issue to be tried so as to enable it to exercise its discretion to grant leave...." As to discretion and forum conveniens, the notes at 11/1/7 state: \t\t"The question which is the appropriate Court, or \'forum conveniens\' is a matter to be considered by the court in exercising its discretion under this Order .
The test is whether the interests of justice are best served by proceedings here or abroad.... under Order 11 the plaintiff is asking for the exercise of the discretion of the court in his favour and must show that the English court is the forum conveniens .
\t\tThe House of Lords in  Spiliada Maritime Corp v Consulex Ltd  ( The Spiliada ) [1986] AC 460 .... has comprehensively reviewed the authorities and stated the principles as follows: \t\t\t(i) The fundamental principle applicable to .... the grant of leave to serve proceedings out of the jurisdiction, is that the court will choose that forum in which the case can be tried more suitably for the interests of all the parties and for the end of justice .
\t\t\t.... \t\t\t(iii) Applications under Order 11, rule 1(1) for leave to serve proceedings out of the jurisdiction are to be determined according to the same principles applicable to a stay of English proceedings subject, however, to the burden being on the plaintiff to show that leave should be granted, and to the court being required to consider both the residence or place of business of the defendant and the relevant ground invoked by the plaintiff when deciding whether to exercise the discretion to grant leave .
Accordingly the plaintiff is required to show not merely that England is the appropriate forum for the trial of the action, but that it is clearly the appropriate forum .
In discharging the burden lying on him, however, the plaintiff is not confined to showing that justice cannot be obtained in an alternative forum, or, if so, only at excessive cost, delay or inconvenience, but is entitled to rely on the nature of the dispute, the legal and practical issues involved and such questions as local knowledge, availability of witnesses and their evidence and expense .
\t\t\t(iv) The fact that .... the refusal of leave under Order 11, rule 1(1) to serve proceedings out of the jurisdiction may deprive the plaintiff of a legitimate personal or judicial advantage available to him under the English jurisdiction will not, as a general rule, deter the court from .... refusing leave if it is satisfied that substantial justice will be done to all the parties in the appropriate forum. .
Whether jurisdiction has been established on the criterion of good arguable case under one of the sub-paragraphs of rule 1(1 ) .
\t    Tai Ping and Central concede that jurisdiction has been established on the criterion of good arguable case under paragraphs 1(1)(d)(i) and (ii) .
They dispute that the reinsurance contracts were by their terms or by implication governed by English law .
Although one ground under Order 11 will suffice, it is convenient to consider the question of the proper law of the reinsurance contracts for the purposes of these applications, at this point of the judgment .
The proper law of the reinsurance contracts \t    It is common ground that the underlying direct insurance contracts were governed by the law of Taiwan .
In the first action the reinsurance slip provided: \t\t"TYPE\t\tErection All Risks and Third Party Liability Reinsurance as original .
\t\tFORM\t\t\tSlip Policy NMA 1779 following original -- original wording as agreed Leading Reinsurance Underwriter .
.... \t\tCONDITIONS\tFull Reinsurance Clause NMA 416 (ex .
retention) Claims Co-operation Clause .
....  NMA 464 unless war and civil war exclusion clause contained in original policy wording .
NMA 1685.... \t\tORIGINAL \t\tCONDITIONS\tAll Risks as per local standard EAR policy wording as approved clauses as follows: .... .... \t\tINFORMATION\tAs on file with Jenner Fenton Slade including separate exhibits seen. .
\t    It is common ground that the relevance to the "full reinsurance clause NMA 416" incorporates the following: \t\t"Full Reinsurance Clause No 1 (Approved by Lloyd\'s Underwriters\' Fire and Non-Marine Association) .
\t\tBeing a Reinsurance of and warranted same gross rate, terms and conditions as and to follow the settlements of the .... Company ...." The Claims Co-operation Clause was in these terms: \t\t"Notwithstanding anything contained in the Reinsurance Agreement and/or Policy wording to the contrary, it is a condition precedent to any liability under this Policy that: \t\t(a)\tThe Reinsured shall, upon knowledge of any circumstances which may give rise to a claim against them, advise the Reinsurers immediately and in any event not later than 30 days; \t\t(b)\tThe Reinsured shall co-operate with Reinsurers and/or their Appointed Representatives subscribing to this Policy in the investigation and assessment of any loss and/or circumstances giving rise to a loss; \t\t(c)\tNo settlement and/or compromise shall be made and liability admitted without the prior approval of Reinsurers .
\t\tAll other terms and conditions of this Policy remain unchanged. .
The above is a standard London Market Claims Co-Operation Clause reference SCOR(UK) Clause 012 4/83 .
\t    In the second action the Reinsurance slip provided: \t\t"FORM\t\tAgree sign NMA 1779 Slip Policy, Reinsurance and/or Company equivalent .
No formal policy to be issued .
.... \t\tINTEREST:\t\t THE CONTRACT \t\t\t\t\tErection works of the FAB III project, Hsin Chu Science based Industrial Park Taiwan. .
There follow printed provisions which read: \t\t"Leading Underwriters Agreement (NMA) off Slips and/or annual re-signings of term policies to be initialled Leading Lloyd\'s Non-Marine Underwriter only .
Increases in signed lines up to written plus 10% subject to agreement and initialment by first two underwriters only .
\t\tPT(NMA) \t\tWordings, Schedules, Proposal Forms and TOR Signings t.b.a .
L/U main slip only .
\t\tAgreed sign renewal receipt if required without production of expiring slip or policy .
Agreed extended for up to one calendar month on agreement L/U main slip only irrespective of individual anniversary date notices of cancellation if any .
Subject otherwise to CCSA 1960, companies agreed authorisation forms not required by closing instructions and addenda will be sent with a form for return within 14 days if necessary showing any objection, admin .
change or amended reference .
By signing this slip signatories to the CCSA 1960 authorise the leading CCSA 1960 company to arrange for LIRMA to sign the policy on its behalf and accept that such signing will be valid signing for the purposes of CCSA 1960 .
\t\tLloyd\'s underwriters and companies (including LIRMA companies) agree to sign co-insurance policy (NMA 2074/5), following the same terms and conditions as the leading insurer, if required .
\t\tLIRMA authorised to accept computer produced lines.... \t\tLloyd\'s Marine Underwriters/ILU and Companies subject to CCSA agreement agree to issue policies on an FDO basis as required .
\t\tAll insurers hereon agree to comply. .
The slip continued: ".... \t\tCONDITIONS:\t1)\tFull Reinsurance Clause -- The Reinsurance is subject in all respects to the same clauses and conditions as Original and to follow in every respect all settlements of Original and to bear the proportion of any expenses incurred whether legal or otherwise in the investigation and defence of a claim .
\t\t\t\t\t.... \t\t\t\t\t6)\tN.M.A 464 War and Civil War Exclusion Clause unless equivalent in Original Policy .
\t\t\t\t\t.... \t\t\t\t\t8)\tLSW 1001.Several Liability Notice .
\t\t\t\t\t.... \t\t\t\t\tIt is understood and agreed that details relating to this Master Cover/Lineslip/Slip will be added to the Lloyds/ILU/Lirma placing support system for the purpose of processing associated Declarations/Endorsements electronically .
It is also acknowledged that Underwriters authorisation for some Declarations/Endorsements may continue to be sought by the broker using a paper Offslip/ Endorsement .
It is also noted that the original paper slip remains the basis of the contract and will not be superseded by the backloaded electronic record .
.... \t\t\t\t\tUnderwriting Information as per AHG Information sheets (51 pages) dated 15 February,1996 seen by Underwriters hereon. .
\t    The Claims Co-Operation Clause was in these terms: \t\t"Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary it is a condition precedent to any liability under this policy that: \t\ta)\tThe Reinsured shall upon knowledge of any loss(es) or occurrence(s) which may give rise to a claim recoverable hereunder advise the Reinsurers thereof as soon as practicable .
\t\tb)\tThe Reinsured shall furnish the Reinsurers with all information available respecting such loss(es) or occurrence(es) and shall co-operate with the Reinsurers in the appointment of Adjusters, Assessors, Surveyors or other experts and in all negotiations, adjustments and settlements .
\t\tIt is understood and agreed that all Adjusters, Assessors, Surveyors or experts appointed in accordance with the provisions of this clause shall be deemed to be acting on behalf of the Reinsured and all reinsurers and that the fees, expenses, costs and all other disbursements incurred in this connection shall be shared pro-rata by all the interested parties. .
This is another standard London Market Clause (London 2 December 1993) .
Tai Ping\'s submissions as to the Proper Law \t    Mr Lockey for Tai Ping submitted as follows .
The principal factors which point to Taiwanese law as the proper law of the reinsurance are as follows:   \t(1)  The reinsurance was a facultative reinsurance of purely Taiwanese risks, namely EAR, relating to a Taiwanese manufacturing plant, owned by a Taiwanese company, and insured by local insurers under a Taiwanese law policy .
\t(2)  To the plaintiff\'s knowledge at the time, the London placement was part only of the facultative protection being purchased by Tai Ping from international reinsurers .
It would be very surprising if different laws were to apply to Tai Ping\'s facultative protection, depending on where the international reinsurers were situate .
\tIt is beside the point that the reinsurance slip uses abbreviations or incorporates clauses which originate in the London market .
\tEven if an English court were to reach the conclusion that English law governed the reinsurance contract as a whole, as a matter of construction the reinsurance contract incorporates clause 22 of the underlying policy and thereby the Taiwanese Insurance Law (including Article 64, the provision dealing with avoidance for misrepresentation) .
The slip provided under Type \'as original\' and under Form \'following original\' .
Under \'Conditions\', the slip incorporates the Full Reinsurance Clause (NMA 416), which provides in material respects as follows: \t\t"Being a reinsurance of and warranted same gross rate, terms and conditions ...." \tTaiwanese law will be material to the misrepresentation defence, even if the Court in due course concludes that English law applies as the proper law of the reinsurance .
Tai Ping will submit, in the appropriate forum, that the plaintiffs are not able to bring themselves within Article 64 of the Insurance Law .
Central\'s submissions as to the Proper Law \t    Mr Berry for Central submitted as follows: \tClause 22, Chapter III of the EAR policy stated "matters not provided for herein shall be governed by the Insurance Law" .
Thus the original insurance explicitly incorporated "the Insurance Law", which is a reference to the Insurance Law Taiwan .
That law includes express provisions as to avoidance for misrepresentation: see Article 64(1) .
\tThe reinsurance contract provides "The Reinsurance is subject in all respects to the same clauses and conditions as Original and to follow in every respect all settlements of Original" .
As a matter of construction this incorporates all clauses of the original policy including clause 22 and thereby the Taiwan Insurance Law .
The incorporation "in all respects" of the clauses and conditions of the original policy, including clause 22, amounts to an implied choice of Taiwanese law for the reinsurance contract as a whole .
Alternatively, even if the governing law of the reinsurance contract as a whole is English law, as a matter of construction under English law the reinsurance contract incorporates clause 22 of the Original, and thereby the Taiwanese Insurance Law, including Article 64 in respect of misrepresentation, and those provisions as incorporated are to be governed by Taiwanese law .
Whatever the governing law of the reinsurance contract as a whole, the Taiwan Insurance Law as interpreted in Taiwan governs questions of avoidance of the reinsurance contract for misrepresentation .
The plaintiffs\' submissions as to Proper Law \t    Mr Edelman QC appeared for the plaintiffs in both actions .
He submitted as follows: \tAn inferred or implied choice of English law for the purposes of Article 3 of the Rome Convention arises out of: \t(1) the use of standard London market forms and clauses, including the Claims Co-Operation Clauses; \t(2)  the incorporation through such clauses of the English law concepts of conditions precedent (through the Claims Co-Operation Clause) and insurance warranties (through the Full Reinsurance Clause; and \t(3)  the circumstances of the placement, being by London market brokers, in London, to London market reinsurers (save for the seventh plaintiff in the second action, Skandia International Insurance Corporation ("Skandia") which dealt with the London brokers) .
\t(4)  Tai Ping\'s reliance on the use in the Slip of the words "as original" and Central\'s reliance on the terms of the Slip "Full Reinsurance Clause -- The Reinsurance is subject in all respects to the same clauses and conditions as Original and to follow in every respect all settlements of Original" are misplaced .
Such words only serve the purpose of equating the scope of cover under the reinsurance with the scope of cover under the insurance .
They may affect the way in which a provision incorporated from the original insurance into the reinsurance falls to be construed so as to give rise to "back-to-back" coverage, but they do not affect or purport expressly or implicitly to affect the law by which the contract is governed:  Pine Top v Unione Italiana  [1987] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 476,  Vesta v Butcher   [1989] AC 852 ,  Arig Insurance v SASA Assicurazione  (unreported) 10.2.98, Tuckey J .
\t    Even if there is no inferred or implied choice of law for the purposes of Article 3, the reinsurance has its closest connection with English law for the purposes of Article 4 for the following reasons: \t(1)  The reinsurance was placed in the London market by London brokers using London market forms and standard clauses (which incorporated English law concepts), with reinsurers operating in the London market .
\t(2)  The Claims Co-Operation Clauses upon which the plaintiffs rely are standard forms used in the London insurance market and incorporate the English law concept of a condition precedent .
\t(3)  The duties of good faith, which arise under English law, are duties on the basis of which the London reinsurance market operates and underwriters in the market regard themselves as being entitled to a fair presentation on the basis of the application of English law .
\t(4)  The performance which is characteristic of a reinsurance contract is the provision of insurance cover by the reinsurer (see page 20 Giuliano-Lagarde report, and Plender, The European Contracts Convention (1991) pp 110-111) .
The central administration of the plaintiffs in the first action and of four of the plaintiffs in the second action is in England (there is an issue as to whether General Accident\'s central administration is in England or Scotland) .
The presumption in relation to those plaintiffs is that English law applies to this reinsurance and there are no factors to rebut the presumption .
English law applies to the placements with the other two or three plaintiffs .
\tThe fact that the defendants may end up with various reinsurances governed by different laws may be an inconvenience to the defendants in certain circumstances, although if the cover arranged is in all cases "back-to-back", there should be no problem on the question of coverage: see  Pine Top v Unione Italiana  (supra) and  Vestra v Butcher  (supra) .
It would be just as inconvenient (if not more so) for a London market reinsurer to find that each reinsurance to which it subscribed was governed by the system of law of the reinsured\'s residence or of the location of the original risk .
If a reinsured wishes to have all its reinsurances in respect of a particular risk governed by a common system of law, it can and should make express stipulation for that to be the case .
The reinsurance in this case was a "stand-alone" facultative placement and falls to be treated as such .
The Proper Law of the Reinsurance Contracts - analysis and conclusions \t    Section 2(1) of the Contracts (Applicable Law) Act 1990 provides that, subject to subsections (2) and (3) the Rome Convention shall have the force of law in the United Kingdom .
\t    Article 3(1) of the Rome Convention provides: \t\t"A contract shall be governed by the law chosen by the parties .
The choice must be express or demonstrated with reasonable certainty by the terms of the contract or the circumstances of the case .
By their choice the parties can select the law applicable to the whole or a part only of the contract. .
Article 4 of the Rome Convention provides: \t\t"(1)  To the extent that the law applicable to the contract has not been chosen in accordance with Article 3, the contract shall be governed by the law of the country with which it is most closely connected .
Nevertheless, a severable part of the contract which has a closer connection with another country may by way of exception be governed by the law of that other country .
\t\t(2)  Subject to the provisions of paragraph (5) of this Article, it shall be presumed that the contract is most closely connected with the country where the party who is to effect the performance which is characteristic of the contract has, at the time of conclusion of the contract, his habitual residence, or, in the case of a body corporate or unincorporate, its central administration .
However, if the contract is entered into in the course of that party\'s trade or profession, that country shall be the country in which the principal place of business is situated or, where under the terms of the contract the performance is to be effected through a place of business other than the principal place of business, the country in which that other place of business is situated .
\t\t.... \t\t(5)  Paragraph (2) shall not apply if the characteristic performance cannot be determined, and the presumptions in paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) shall be disregarded if it appears from the circumstances as a whole that the contract is more closely connected with another country. .
1 .
Implied choice of English Law As is pointed out in Dicey and Morris Conflict of Laws 12th Edition at page 1224: \t\t"The Giuliano-Lagarde Report gives a number of examples of circumstances which may demonstrate an inferred intention: the examples are plainly inspired by the English case-law prior to the Convention .
The first example in the Report is the circumstance that the contract may be in a standard form which is known to be governed by a particular system of law even though there is no express statement to this effect, such as a Lloyd\'s policy of maritime insurance .
The Report was written and published before the decision in  Amin Rasheed Shipping Corp v Kuwait Insurance Co , in which a marine insurance policy was issued by a Kuwaiti insurance company to a Liberian company carrying on business in the Gulf .
The policy was based on the Lloyd\'s standard form of marine policy .
It was held that, although the policy contained no express choice of English law, its provisions pointed ineluctably to the conclusion that the intention of the parties was that their mutual rights and obligations under it should be determined in accordance with the English law of marine insurance. .
\t    The reinsurance contracts, the subject matter of both actions, were placed in London on the London market .
The terms of the slips and the Claims Co-Operation Clauses demonstrate an implied choice of English law "demonstrated with reasonably certainty by the terms of the contract/the circumstances of the case" .
I refer in particular to the following provisions: first action: Slip Policy NMA 1779, Full Reinsurance Clause NMA 416, Claims Co-Operation Clause \'NMA 464, NMA 1685 and the Claims Co-Operation Clause itself; second action: NMA 1779 Slip Policy, the printed terms at the foot of the first page of the Slip, the full Reinsurance clause, NMA 464 War and Civil War Exclusion Clause, LSW 1001.Several Liability Clause, the references to Lloyds/ILU/Lirma placing support system, and the terms of the Claims Co-Operation Clause itself .
\t    The words "as original" in the Tai Ping Slip and the words "The Reinsurance is subject in all respects to the same clauses and conditions as original" in the Central Slip were intended to ensure that the risk undertaken by reinsurers was identical as to period, geographical limits and nature of the risk, with the risk undertaken by Tai Ping/Central as direct insurers: see  Pine Top v Unione Italiana  (supra) Gatehouse J;  Vesta v Butcher  (supra) p 875A, Neill LJ; and  Arig Insurance v SASA Assicuriazione  (supra), Tuckey J .
Also in this connection there should be noted a passage in the speech of Lord Griffiths in  Vesta v Butcher  at page 896C-E.   2 .
Article 4 of the Rome Convention \t    If, contrary to the above I am wrong as to implied choice of English law, the reinsurance contracts the subject matter of both actions are governed by the law of the country with which they are most closely connected, ie England .
It is to be presumed that the reinsurance contracts are most closely connected with England where the principal places of business of both plaintiffs in the first action and the principal places of business of four or five out of seven plaintiffs in the second action are situated: see Article 4(2) .
It does not appear from the circumstances as a whole that the reinsurance contracts are more closely connected with Taiwan (Article 4(5)) .
In the case of all plaintiffs, the reinsurance contracts are governed by the law of the country (England) with which they are most closely connected .
The reasoning under heading 1 above (Implied choice of English law) is repeated so far as applicable .
\t    Thus, the third ground under Order 11, rule 1(1)(d)(iii) is also made out, but the particular importance of this conclusion is in relation to discretion and forum conveniens as to which see below .
Whether there is a serious issue to be tried so as to enable the court to exercise its discretion to grant leave   \t    Tai Ping and Central concede this .
Negative  Declarations \t    Mr Lockey for Tai Ping submitted as follows: \t"Claims for declarations, and in particular negative declarations, must be viewed with great caution in all situations involving possible conflicts of jurisdictions, since they obviously lend themselves to improper attempts at forum shopping":  The Volvox Hollandia  [1988] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 361, at 371, Kerr LJ;  First National Bank of Boston v Union Bank of Switzerland  [1990] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 32 at 38, Sir Michael Kerr. .
\tThe plaintiffs were attempting to steal a jurisdictional march on the natural plaintiff (and the only party with a monetary claim), namely Tai Ping .
At the time of issue of their proceedings, the plaintiffs had not formally declined Tai Ping\'s claim and had not served notice of avoidance .
The plaintiffs were forum shopping in the knowledge that proceedings in Taiwan would inevitably follow their rejection of the claim and avoidance of the reinsurance contract .
The undue haste of the ex parte application, and the blatant attempt at forum shopping should weigh heavily in the balance in considering whether this was a proper case for leave to serve out .
\t    Mr Berry for Central submitted as follows: \tCentral, as the reinsured with a monetary claim against the plaintiffs, are the natural plaintiffs .
The nature of the action, being one solely for negative declarations by natural defendants, "must be viewed with great caution in all situations involving possible conflicts of jurisdiction since they obviously lend themselves to improper attempts at forum shopping":  Volvox Hollandia  (supra) at 371 .
The action was commenced with indecent haste .
It was launched before the plaintiffs had given notice of any avoidance, which came only in the form of paragraph 14 of the Points of Claim .
It was not preceded by any letter before action .
The plaintiffs have indulged in improper forum shopping in a case where they perceive advantage in any ultimate trial in having the issues pending in "home" territory .
\t    Mr Edelman for the plaintiffs submitted as follows:   \tIn cases where negative declaratory relief is sought the court must consider (separately from the forum conveniens issue) whether there is justification for seeking the relief .
In considering whether there is justification for seeking the relief, the court must be particularly careful to ensure that the negative declaration is sought for a valid and valuable purpose and not in an illegitimate attempt to pre-empt the jurisdiction in which the dispute between the parties is to be resolved .
The focus on this aspect is on the question whether the relief sought can be justified rather than on the forum in which it should be sought:  New Hampshire v Phillips Electronics  (supra) pp 8A-10A, Phillips LJ .
Whilst the relief sought in this case is declaratory and negative, in the sense that its object is establishing that the plaintiffs are not liable to the defendants in respect of the claim made under the reinsurance, the relief is confined to issues on which the burden of proof rests with the plaintiffs (ie avoidance and non-compliance with a condition precedent) .
The plaintiffs are therefore natural plaintiffs on those issues .
The relief sought is useful in that it will determine the two threshold issues raised by the plaintiffs that stand in the way of the defendants\' recovery under the reinsurances of their outlay to the assured .
The relief is neither premature nor hypothetical .
On the contrary, it addresses live issues which had arisen between the parties prior to the commencement of the proceedings .
The plaintiffs were not in fact motivated by "forum shopping" motives .
Rather, the plaintiffs were motivated by an anxiety to justify their conduct in order to protect their reputation and chose to issue proceedings in London as it appeared to be (and is) the most appropriate forum for the determination of the issues raised by the plaintiffs, who as London market reinsurers dealt only with the defendants\' London brokers .
\tEven if the plaintiffs had deliberately commenced proceedings in an attempt to pre-empt the jurisdiction in which the dispute between the parties was to be resolved, that would not in the circumstances of this case be inappropriate or illegitimate .
Negative declaratory relief is the only form of relief available to the plaintiffs and seeking that relief in England is the only way in which the plaintiffs can ensure that their rights are determined by the proper law of the contract, ie English Law, and in the jurisdiction where they and the defendants\' brokers with whom they dealt carry on business: cf .
Akai v People\'s Insurance Co  [1998] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 90, 106 col 2 .
If any accusation of illegitimate forum shopping is to be made, it is most appropriately made against the defendants by way of their pursuit of these applications, the purpose and effect of which, if successful, will be to give the defendants a clear run in Taiwan, where Taiwanese law will probably be applied so as to remove the legal foundation of the plaintiffs\' cases and, no doubt, the plaintiffs\' cases on the Claims Co-Operation Clauses .
Negative Declarations: analysis and conclusions \t    In  New Hampshire v Phillips Electronics  (supra) Phillips LJ said at page 8: \t\t"In my judgment it is necessary to distinguish between two matters: the nature of the relief and the forum in which the relief should be sought .
The authorities demonstrate that a negative declaration is an extraordinary form of relief and one that the Court will only entertain if there is good reason for seeking it .
The test applied by Lord Wilberforce in  Camilla Cotton Oil  [1976] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 10, 14 was whether the relief would be "useful" .
That was a case where service had been effected within the jurisdiction .
In  Insurance Corporation of Ireland v Strombus International Insurance Company  [1985] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 138, 144, Mustill LJ in an Order 11 case said: \t\t\t\'.... the Court should be careful not to bring a foreigner here as a defendant, where no positive relief is claimed against him, unless it can be shown that a solid practical benefit would ensue.\' \t\tI do not read this as dissenting from the pragmatic test applied by Lord Wilberforce other than to emphasise the care that must be taken when exercising the Order 11 jurisdiction .
I am inclined to think, having regard to the nature of the relief sought, that it will always be possible to describe a valid ground for seeking that relief as \'a special reason\', although as a test that phrase is so general as to be of little practical assistance .
But, whatever the test, I do not see that it has any bearing on the question of whether England is the appropriate forum in which to seek the relief .
\t\tWhere leave to serve out of the jurisdiction a writ claiming a negative declaration is challenged, the Court will have to consider both the question whether there is justification for seeking that relief and the separate question of whether England is the appropriate forum in which to seek it .
The two questions will, however, cover common ground where the possibility exists that the plaintiff in the English proceedings will be sued by the defendant in an alternative jurisdiction .
It is in that situation that the Court must be particularly careful to ensure that the negative declaration is sought for a valid and valuable purpose and not in an illegitimate attempt to pre-empt the jurisdiction in which the dispute between the parties is to be resolved. .
\t    I consider both the question whether there is justification for seeking the relief in this case and the separate question of whether England is the appropriate forum in which to seek the relief claimed .
\t    On 28 April 1997 GAN wrote to Jenner Fenton Slade, the brokers who placed the risk for Tai Ping, as follows: \t\t"As you will know we lead the reinsurance of Tai Ping and also participate as a following reinsurer on the reinsurance of Central .
\t\tRoyal Insurance as leader of the \'Central\' slip have raised through the brokers Alexander Howden various questions concerning whether the fire precautions which formed part of the underwriting information were in fact installed and in full working order at the time of the loss as required by the policy .
\t\tThat has led us to look at the underwriting information which was provided to this company and our following market .
We see that as part of the placing information we were provided with drawings of the fire protection system together with a statement on those drawings to the effect that there were six separate fire protection systems .
There were described as follows: \t\t\t\'Fire Alarm System \t\t\t Fire Hose and Hydrant System \t\t\t Carbon Dioxide System \t\t\t Sprinkler System \t\t\t Foam Water System \t\t\t Fog Water System\' \t\tWith the exception of the alarm and sprinkler systems, no mention of how the other systems operated is made in the adjusters\' reports or in the forensic report of Messrs Burgoyne & Partners .
We now request that our cedant takes immediate steps to instruct Messrs Burgoyne & Partners to review the adequacy and functioning of each of the fire precautions mentioned in the placing information and to prepare a report considering: \t\t(a)\tWhether the precautions were as stated in the underwriting information .
\t\t(b)\tWhether those precautions were in place and serviceable as required by Endorsement 206 .
\t\t(c)\tWhat part those precautions played in the actual detection and containment of the fire .
\t\t(d)\tWhether those precautions were installed and commissioned in accordance with the specification supplied by Angel Engineering Consultants .
\t\t(e)\tWhether Angel Engineering Consultants approved the final installation .
\t\t(f)\tWhether the installation  as installed commissioned and tested was in accordance with competent engineering standards .
\t\tFrom our participation on the slip led by Royal, we know that Central have raised these concerns with Tai Ping .
We understand that there has been a reluctance to address these issues resulting in the Royal imposing a general reservation of rights which we will adopt and ratify on our behalf insofar as we participate on the Royal slip .
\t\tWe think it is only fair to point out that should our reinsured on this slip, the Tai Ping, fail to respond to our request that these matters be investigated, then we will consider that to be a breach of the Claim Co-operation Clause .
\t\tAccordingly we would be grateful if you would bring to the attention of the Tai Ping our concerns and invite then to carry out the investigations we have suggested or alternatively if those investigations have already been carried out let us have a copy of any report prepared by the adjuster or forensic investigator dealing with the same .
\t\tWe look forward to hearing from you with your confirmation that our concerns have been passed on to Tai Ping and thereafter with the Tai Ping\'s response as soon as possible .
\t\tWould you also please circulate this letter to our following market for their information. .
\t    On 20 March 1997 Royal & Sun Alliance wrote to Alexander Howden, the brokers who placed the risk for Central as follows: \t\t"Further to our fax of 14 February we have had the opportunity of considering the various reports which have been provided and had discussions with our underwriter .
\t\tIn particular we were alarmed to read that there was no sprinkler protection in the roof void and also an absence of any real passive fire protection measures .
\t\tOn reviewing the underwriting information we note that in a copy fax dated 13 February 1996 it was stated that: \t\t\t\'The project has installed a very good fire protection system which includes below six fire protections in every floor .
\t\t\t1.\tFire Alarm System .
\t\t\t2.\tFire Hose and Hydrant System .
\t\t\t3.\tCarbon Dioxide System .
\t\t\t4.\tSprinkler System .
\t\t\t5.\tFoam/Water System .
\t\t\t6.\tFog Water System.\' \t\tWe were also informed that the local policy would include Endorsement 206 in the Munich Re form .
\t\tThe underwriting information also indicated that the fire precautions were in accordance with drawings provided by Angel Engineering Consultants Limited .
\t\tGiven such an extensive list of fire precautions and the Munich Re endorsement, it is not unfair to ask why each of these cautions appear to have failed .
\t\tWe would therefore be grateful if you would indicate to our cedant that we suggest that they instruct Burgoyne & Partners to review the adequacy and functioning of each of the fire precautions, notably: \t\ta.\tWhether the precautions were as stated in the underwriting information .
\t\tb.\tWhether those precautions were in place and serviceable as required by Endorsement 206 .
\t\tc.\tWhat part those precautions played in the actual detection and containment of the fire .
\t\td.\tWhether those precautions were installed and commissioned in accordance with the specification supplied by Angel Engineering Consultants .
\t\te.\tWhether Angel Engineering Consultants approved the final installation .
\t\tf.\tWhether the installation as installed, commissioned and tested was in accordance with competent engineering standards .
\t\tAs similar information was presumably provided at the underwriting stage to the cedant, they can no doubt supply the documents in question to Messrs Burgoyne & Partners but if not we can supply them from our files with the exception of the Angel Engineering Consultants\' specification which we did not retain .
\t\tWhile writing, this is perhaps an appropriate place to repeat the request make in our fax of 14 February to be supplied with copies of the following: \t\t1.\tThe recision letter from our cedant to Winbond .
\t\t2.\tWinbond\'s response .
\t\t3.\tAny lawyer\'s report commenting on policy liability obtained by our cedant .
\t\t4.\tA copy of the "audit report" which we understand was to be completed following Relectronic-Remech\'s third visit to site .
\t\t5.\tCopies of cedant\'s notes relating to the weekly meetings of coinsurers .
\t\tWe look forward to hearing from you as a matter of some urgency. .
\t    I refer to the letters referred to in the chronology in the first action, AF 3 (but not the comments column), and to Tai Ping\'s letter of 27 August 1997 .
I also refer to the letters referred to in the chronology in the second action, AF 2 (but again not to the comments column) .
The correspondence following the letters of 28 April and 20 March 1997 quoted above reflects apparent failures to respond to the points raised in those letters .
In my opinion the plaintiffs have established a good arguable case that there is good reason for seeking the relief, that the relief is useful, that a solid practical benefit will ensue, and that the declarations are sought for a valid and valuable purpose .
Discretion and Forum Conveniens \t    It is convenient to consider this subject under the heads (a) negative declarations; (b) generally; (c) avoidance issues; (d) the claims co-operation clauses issues; (e) joinder of brokers; (f) conclusion .
(a)  Negative Declarations \t    The analysis and conclusions set out above are repeated .
(b)  Generally \t    As issues relating to avoidance and the claims co-operation clauses fall to be determined according to English law, there is a strong case for saying that England is the natural and appropriate forum in which to resolve these issues: see  New Hampshire v Phillips Electronics  (supra) at 14G, where Phillips LJ said: \t\t"As the issues of construction fall to be determined according to English law, I consider that England was the natural and appropriate forum in which to seek to resolve those issues. .
In particular as to the claims co-operation clauses, these are standard London reinsurance market clauses designed to protect the position of London market reinsurers .
There is an issue as to whether the effect of a breach is to exclude recovery or merely to require the reinsured to prove its liability .
They are expressed in English and utilise the English law of concept of a condition precedent .
(c) Avoidance Issues \t    The issues will be (1) were the alleged representations made; (2) were the representations untrue; (3) if so, were the facts which were misrepresented material and were the plaintiffs induced thereby to enter into the reinsurance contracts .
\t    As to issue (1) in the first action, the plaintiffs rely on a document entitled "Winbond FAB III Project, Phase I, Fire Protection System", and in particular on page 94 in the bundle which includes in manuscript the words:  \t\t"1.\tFire Alarm System .
\t\t 2.\tFire Hose and Hydrant System .
\t\t 3.\tCarbon Dioxide System .
\t\t 4.\tSprinkler S. \t\t 5.\tFoam-Water S.... \t\t 6 .
Fog-Water S." Under "General Notes" is found National Fire Codes:  \t\t"B.\tNFPA 13 -- Installation of Sprinkler System. .
It is not admitted that these pages formed part of the placing information .
Thus evidence will be required from two London underwriters and the London brokers .
\t    As to issue (1) in the second action, the alleged representation is contained in a fax dated 13 February 1996 from Alexander & Alexander (Taiwan) Ltd to Mr Gell, AHG -- London which stated: \t\t"The following are the answers to your questions.... \t\tD)\tThis project has installed a very good Fire Protection system which includes below six fire protections in every floor .
\t\t\t1.\tFire Alarm System \t\t\t2.\tFire Hose and Hydrant System \t\t\t3.\tCarbon Dioxide System \t\t\t4.\tSprinkler System \t\t\t5.\tFoam-Water System \t\t\t6.\tFog-Water System \t\tWe have got a book of the Fire Protection Map (52 pages of B4 size) in hand (the cover page is attached) .
Please advise us if we need to courier the book to you for underwriters\' further reference .
\t\tAs we mentioned before, we need your quick action to check with ARIG and Gerling for their acceptance of the business .
Should you have any other markets to go, please feel free to approach them. .
\t    As to issue (2) Tai Ping\'s skeleton argument states: \t\t"Mr Lowe deposes .... that the engineering drawings show the precise locations of the systems and make it clear that these systems were not present on floor 4 of FAB III. .
Mr Steven Lowe, a partner in Stephenson Harwood, solicitors for Tai Ping, states at paragraph 13 of his affidavit: \t\t"....: I am informed by Mr Su Ming-Teh of the Taipei Fire Fighting Equipment Association (an expert in fire fighting engineering) that foam water and fog water systems are only used in wafer plants in a very limited capacity, the main fire fighting systems employed in water plants being sprinklers, hydrants and hand held extinguishers, and that the drawings do show that there was a foam water and a fog water system, but not on floor 4 of FAB III where the fire occurred .
The location of the foam water and fog water systems is clearly indicated in the printed Drawing Index and Pump Schedule in the index page to the drawings, and in the detailed drawings themselves .
The drawings also show that there was a carbon dioxide system in the power substation and generator room, it being common in Taiwan only to use carbon dioxide systems in high danger areas such as power stations and generator rooms, but not on floor 4 of FAB III .
Mr Su further informs me that the detailed drawings which take precedence over any General Notes, make no provision for sprinklers in the ceiling voids .
The General Notes refer to NFPA 13 standards which envisage sprinklers in the voids, but these apply in the United States and have no statutory or regulatory effect in Taiwan, and the detailed drawings, which show no sprinkler system in the ceiling voids, would obviously prevail in the event of any inconsistency between the detailed drawings and the General Notes...." See further the report by Burgoynes .
\t    It is not clear to what extent the relevant facts will be in dispute at trial .
Discovery will probably narrow any need for factual evidence .
To the extent that factual evidence is required on this subject, Mr Robbins of Burgoynes is likely to be the most important witness and he is in Singapore .
Evidence from Mr Purdon might be required .
He is in Taiwan .
Both Mr Robbins and Mr Purdon speak English .
\t    As to issue (3), evidence will be required from six London underwriters and one underwriter from Stockholm and probably expert witnesses from the London market .
(d)  The Claims Co-operation Clauses Issues \t    The issues will be: (1) did the defendants fail to co-operate in any legally relevant sense with the plaintiffs in the investigation and assessment of the loss and/or circumstances giving rise to the loss .
(2) Did Tai Ping settle and/or compromise the assured\'s claim and/or admit liability therefor without the plaintiffs\' prior approval .
Did Central furnish the plaintiffs with all information available and co-operate in all negotiations, adjustments and settlements .
(3) What are the consequences of any failures of Tai Ping/Central as in (2) above .
\t    As to issue (1), the documents will provide essential evidence .
I refer again to the documents listed to in the chronologies .
The plaintiffs at all times dealt with the defendants\' London brokers .
I note the way the plaintiffs\' claims against the defendants are pleaded in the Points of Claim in the two actions and by way of example only refer to the reference to "investigations .... relevant to the issue of [Tai Ping\'s/Central\'s] liability to Winbond" .
This may be sensitive to some factual evidence from Taiwan (and evidence as to the law of Taiwan) .
As to the law of Taiwan, the affidavit evidence before me suggests that it should be possible to agree this .
I consider that discovery will probably narrow any need for factual evidence .
To the extent that factual evidence is required, I have already referred to Mr Robbins of Burgoynes and to Mr Purdon of GAB Robins .
If any further factual evidence is required from Taiwan it is in my view likely to be within relatively narrow limits .
\t    As to issue (2), in the first action it is not contended by Tai Ping that the plaintiffs\' consent was obtained .
In the second action this issue will primarily require consideration of the documents .
\t    As to issue (3), the construction of the clauses is a matter of English law .
For the avoidance of doubt I take into account (1) Tai Ping\'s argument that even if the plaintiffs established a breach of the Claims Co-operation Clause, Tai Ping is nonetheless entitled to recover the plaintiffs\' share of the settlement if Tai Ping is able to demonstrate its liability to Windbond for at least the amount at which Tai Ping settled and (2) Central\'s argument that even if the plaintiffs establish a breach of the Claims Co-operation Clause, Central is nonetheless entitled to recover if Central is able to prove that it was liable to Windbond and the quantum of that liability, and (3) the effect of these arguments (if correct) on the need for evidence from Taiwan .
Even if these arguments prove to be correct I do not consider that there would be a significant increase in the need for evidence from overseas beyond that referred to above .
(e)  Joinder of Brokers \t    Tai Ping state they wish to claim against the Taiwanese brokers .
Tai Ping can join its Taiwanese brokers as a third party to this action if it wishes to pursue a claim against those brokers: Order 11, rule 1(1)(c) and Order 16 .
As the London and Taiwanese brokers are now part of the Aon International Group, no prejudice will flow from that claim being dealt with in this country .
In relation to a third party claim, evidence from witnesses in Taiwan becomes potentially relevant .
However, all the potential witnesses appear to be able to correspond in English .
The extent to which any issues of fact in the third party proceedings will be contentious is not something which has been explored in detail before me .
Discretion and Forum Conveniens Conclusion \t    In all the circumstances I conclude that the plaintiffs have shown not merely that England is the appropriate forum for the trial of the actions, but that it is clearly the appropriate forum .
It follows that these applications must be dismissed .
MR EDELMAN:  My Lord, I am grateful .
I would ask that the applications be dismissed with costs .
MR BERRY:  My Lord, I for my part for Central cannot resist that .
MR EDELMAN:  My Lord, I would ask for a certificate for two counsel on the plaintiffs\' behalf .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Yes, certainly .
Mr Berry .
MR BERRY:  My Lord, I would ask for leave to appeal on two grounds .
Your Lordship has applied the  Pine Top  and following decisions to the present circumstances and your Lordship has advanced, as it were, the sum of human decisions in two respects .
Firstly, this is the first time that that line of authority has been applied to a Proper Law Clause as opposed to an arbitration or jurisdiction clause .
So there is an advance there .
Secondly, that form of wording is, if I may put it this way, on the original wording of the full reinsurance clause, whereas in my policy the wording is wider and I would certainly submit that it is a point of some interest and importance in which the Court of Appeal might well be interested that those two further steps have been taken by your Lordship .
My Lord, our other point would be that your Lordship has said that the true interpretation of a claims co-operation clause is a matter of English law and that may well be right if your Lordship is right about the proper law .
Your Lordship has weighed that in the balance without, in our submission, weighing in the balance the consequences if we prove to be right about that and that it is a clause that leaves it open to the Taiwanese insured\'s to prove the original liability .
We would submit that that is a factor to which your Lordship did not pay the requisite weight and that there would in effect in this court have to be a retrial of the original claim by Winbond .
For those reasons, my Lord, I would apply for leave to appeal .
MR LOCKEY:  My Lord, I make a similar application .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Mr Edelman .
MR EDELMAN:  My Lord, on the second point that is, in fact, even if not explicitly, implicitly covered because my Lord addressed directly under the Claims Co-operation Clause issues the implication that there might be in the way the case is pleaded of an investigation into the issue of the liability at the head of the claim, so to speak .
So my Lord had directly addressed that issue in that context .
My Lord, in my submission that line of attack is groundless .
As to the first ground, my Lord it is a situation where my learned friends came armed without any authority at all and have not been able to gainsay the entire body of authority which indicates how these clauses are to be approached and a unanimity amongst all the judges this matter has come before .
It is a unanimity which is not based on the particular clause which is said to be incorporated, but is a unanimity as to a matter of principle which is then applied to a particular clause .
So, my Lord, my submission is that it does not in fact raise a new question of law .
It is simply applying existing law to this situation .
My Lord, there is no new point of law there .
Then, my Lord, ultimately the most fundamental point, the issue as to whether or not England is the most appropriate forum is a matter of discretion balancing all the factors and there are a number of factors which my Lord has identified .
In all the circumstances an exercise of discretion is not an appropriate matter for leave to appeal .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Yes .
I am not prepared to grant leave to appeal in this case .
If I am asked to revise what was a long ex tempore judgment, I would be grateful if the shorthand writers could be provided with the underlying papers so that they can add the quotations and be assisted so far as possible .
MR BERRY:  My Lord, there is one other slightly technical matter .
If we were minded to ask the Court of Appeal for the leave that your Lordship has just refused, we would be put in this difficulty .
As the time limits presently stand, we would be required to file a defence prior to the time limit before making that application to the Court of Appeal and certainly prior to the time at which the Court of Appeal would determine that application .
So I would apply your Lordship to extend the time for the filing of a defence to four weeks, which is the time for appealing to the court of appeal and if notice of appeal with an application for leave is filed within that time then the extension to carry on until such time as those applications are determined .
My Lord, that is the only way of preserving our possibilities -- MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Otherwise you will take a step in the action .
MR BERRY:  Otherwise we will be forced to take a step in the action before the time at which we know whether we are able to appeal and will be put in the position at which the ( inaudible ) appears to apply, which is that we cannot do it .
MR LOCKEY:  Mr Lord, technically the application that I would make -- and I think this is the application that Mr Berry is making -- is an application to extend time under Order 12, rule 8(6) .
It is not confined simply to the service of the defence -- MR EDELMAN:  I accept that .
What we are talking about here is extending time for acknowledgment of service .
Can I short-circuit it by saying that my instructions are not to oppose an extension of time to four weeks .
Thereafter, if leave to appeal be granted, extend time until determination of the appeal subject to the appeal being prosecuted with reasonable diligence .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Thank you, Mr Edelman .
When this matter, if it does, returns to this court, it seems to me that there is a strong case for directions for a speedy trial .
I do not know whether Order 14 proceedings were contemplated or not .
MR LOCKEY:  They were, my Lord, yes .
In particular, against Tai Ping directed to the Claims Co-operation point .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Yes, but obviously if you decide to proceed with Order 14 proceedings, directions would be inappropriate .
But no doubt you will reflect on this, Mr Edelman .
Frequently it is the experience of this court that a speedy trial operates more effectively than proceedings for summary judgment .
MR EDELMAN:  My Lord, yes .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  And it should be possible in this court to bring these issues on for trial very quickly .
MR EDELMAN:  My Lord, yes .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  And I personally would support the giving of directions for a speedy trial .
MR LOCKEY( .
):  My Lord, I have to say one thing which was occurring to me, rather than Order 14 as to which I share my Lord\'s reticence from my own personal experience, not merely directly but also seeing what happens to other cases, is consideration as to whether there might be speedy trial of certain issues .
MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL:  Yes, that is another possible approach but whether it is a trial of all issues or prima issues ordered by the court I think this is a case where, subject to any application that is made elsewhere, we should get on with it .
\t________________________________________  .
b'MR JUSTICE RIX:\t This is an interesting question under the Arbitration Act 1996 .
An arbitration has been commenced by- Baltic Shipping Company against Azov Shipping .
Both those companies were shipping companies in the USSR .
As a result of the splitting up of that Union disputes have occurred and an agreement was entered into by a number of former soviet shipping companies to deal with the question of their containers, and it is in issue as to whether Azov is a party to that agreement .
That agreement contains an arbitration clause which, of course, is only binding on Azov if it is a party to the agreement in the first place.\r\n   The parties have agreed that if there is jurisdiction to arbitrate, in effect, that is to say if Azov is a party to the agreement, then Mr Donald Davies should be their sole arbitrator .
The issue of his jurisdiction was in the first instance left to him under section 30 of the new Act .
That, however, was under full reservations by Azov as to its not being a party to the agreement and thus there not being jurisdiction in Mr Davies to act as an arbitrator.\r\n   There was a three day hearing before Mr Davies solely on the preliminary point as to his jurisdiction in January of this year .
Mr Davies rendered his award on 30th January and it was in favour of Baltic, that is to say he found that Azov was a party to the agreement and that he therefore did have jurisdiction .
He had to consider a number of questions, both of fact and of foreign law, and witnesses of fact and expert witnesses of foreign law gave evidence before him orally and were cross cross-examined .
He found that Azov\'s expert witness was somewhat evasive and partisan .
He also found that the essential question of fact he had to decide as to whether Azov was or was not a party to the agreement was one as to which he had "no hesitation in conceding that I have had some uncertainty" .
He said that even after hearing the oral evidence and cross-examination to which I have referred.\r\n   Azov as the losing party to that award now seeks to challenge it, as is its right, and that is not in dispute, under section 67 of the Act .
That reads:\r\n   "(1) A party to arbitral proceedings may (upon notice to the other parties and to the tribunal) apply to the court - "(a) challenging any award of the arbitral tribunal as to its substantive jurisdiction. .
Where a challenge to an arbitrator\'s substantive jurisdiction is made, the party that challenges the jurisdiction has a number of options under the Act .
It may agree to participate in the argument before the arbitrator of the question of his competence and jurisdiction: see section 30 of the Act .
It may do so while reserving its right to challenge the arbitrator\'s award as to his own competence (see section 67) .
Of course, it may accept the award of the arbitrator even though it be against its own submission .
In that case no question of challenge arises.\r\n   Alternatively, it may seek, without arguing the matter before the arbitrator, to promote the determination of the preliminary point of jurisdiction by the court under section 32 .
Under the terms of that section, that can only be done either where there is agreement in writing of all of the parties to the arbitral proceedings that it be done, or where there is permission from the arbitral tribunal for such a determination, and if the court is satisfied that that determination is likely to produce substantial savings in costs, that the application was made without delay and that there is good reason why the matter should be decided by the court (see section 32(2)).\r\n   The 1996 Report on the Arbitration Bill under the chairmanship of Saville LJ (as he then was) suggests in paragraph 140 that an application to the court for it to determine the point of jurisdiction under what is now section 32 would be very much the exception and it was to that end that section 32 was narrowly drawn .
It was also there suggested that it would be the party wishing to arbitrate that would seek to make use of the powers under section 32 .
That may be so, but the application can be made by any party to the arbitral proceedings, and as I understand the matter, even a party which is disputing the substantive jurisdiction of the arbitrator would be such a party for the purposes of section 32.\r\n   The third option of someone disputing an arbitrator\'s jurisdiction is to stand aloof and question the status of the arbitration by proceedings in court for a declaration, injunction or other appropriate relief under section 72 of the Act .
In such a case he is in the same position as a party to arbitral proceedings who challenges an award under section 67 on the ground that there was no substantive jurisdiction .
He takes the risk, however, that in the meantime an award on the merits might be entered against him .
However, in the typical case in which he has made his objection plain and seeks to protect his position by an application under section 72 it is perhaps unlikely, though of course possible, that an arbitrator would proceed to a final award on the merits before the matter has been dealt with in the courts .
The Act nevertheless makes it clear that the arbitrator can do so.\r\n   The question before me in this context is this: where a full scale hearing on jurisdiction has been heard before the arbitrator under section 30 and there is a challenge to his award on jurisdiction under section 67, can the challenger seek an order from the court as to directions (for the purpose of the relevant arbitration application) which enable him to present his case and challenge the opposing party\'s case on the question of jurisdiction with the full panoply of oral evidence and cross-examination, so that, in effect, the challenge becomes a complete rehearing of all that has already occurred before the arbitrator?\r\n   Order 73 rule 14 begins as follows:\r\n   "(1) The court may give such directions as to the conduct of the arbitration application as it thinks best adapted to secure the just, expeditious and economical disposal thereof .
(2) Where the court considers that there is or may be a dispute as to fact and that the just, expeditious and economical disposal of the application can best be secured by hearing the application on oral evidence, or mainly on oral evidence, it may, if it thinks fit, order that no further evidence shall be filed and that the application shall be heard on oral evidence or partly on oral evidence and partly on affidavit evidence, with or without the cross-examination of any of the deponents as it may direct .
(3) The court may give directions as to the filing of evidence and as to the attendance of deponents for cross-examination and any directions which it could give in proceedings begun by writ. .
On behalf of Baltic, Mr Christopher Smith submits that it would be neither just, expeditious nor economical to permit such a complete rehearing .
He submits that if such a rehearing were to be permitted then every case where an arbitrator gave an award as to his own jurisdiction under section 30 would be challenged by the losing party and would simply lead to a reduplication of costs, and that is obviously not economical .
Nor is it, he submits, just in a situation where a party is not secured for those costs.\r\n   He submits that the right course for a party who wishes to make his substantial challenge to jurisdiction in the court is not to participate in a hearing under section 30, but to stand aloof and to go to court under the combination of section 72 and section 67 .
Section 72, of course, would be enough where there is no award on jurisdiction .
Section 67 would need to be invoked as well where in the meantime an arbitrator had made an award as to jurisdiction.\r\n   It seems to me that there is a certain force in that submission, but, nevertheless, on balance I have come to the conclusion that, in at any rate this case, I should permit the challenge which Azov is perfectly entitled to make under section 67 to be accompanied by oral evidence and cross-examination.\r\n   This was perhaps a case where the parties might well have come to court, either by agreement or upon an application from the one side or the other for the court to determine the issues of jurisdiction, on the ground that it was likely to produce substantial savings in cost and that there was good reason why the matter should be decided by the court .
With hindsight it seems to me that even if the parties could not agree upon that course, the court would be persuaded to allow such a determination if, of course, the tribunal had given its own permission, which is a sine qua non in the absence of the agreement of the parties .
It might be assumed that the arbitrator may have been the more willing to give his agreement inasmuch as the question of jurisdiction in this case involved the prior question of whether Azov had ever become a party to the agreement as a whole.\r\n   As a matter of fact there appears to have been no attempt to secure agreement between the parties and there certainly was no application by either party for such a court determination .
So that matter is neutral, save, I suppose, that inasmuch as the Report on the Bill contemplates that the running, on such an application, is primarily that of the party who wishes to arbitrate rather than that of the party who wishes to challenge the arbitration, the burden of the absence of such an application rests upon Baltic rather than upon Azov.\r\n   I can quite see that there is an interest in encouraging parties to put their arguments on jurisdiction before the arbitrator himself under section 30 .
In many cases, and perhaps in the ordinary and normal case of such a challenge, where, for instance, there is simply an issue as to the width of an arbitration clause and no issue as to whether a party is bound to the relevant contract in the first place, the arbitrator\'s view may be accepted .
If it is not, a challenge to the court is likely to be a limited affair raising, essentially, a point of construction on the clause and thus no problem arises .
Where, however, there are substantial issues of fact as to whether a party has made the relevant agreement in the first place, then it seems to me that, even if there has already been a full hearing before the arbitrators the court, upon a challenge under section 67, should not be placed in a worse position than the arbitrator for the purpose of determining that challenge .
On the particular facts of this case, this seems to me to be a  fortiori  the position where the arbitrator who did have the benefit of oral evidence has said that he has come to his final decision as to whether Azov is a party to the agreement with uncertainty .
It is not as though the court is required to review a challenge to the arbitrator\'s award on jurisdiction through the eyes of the arbitrator or on his findings of fact .
As paragraph 143 of the Report on the Bill makes clear -- "A challenge to jurisdiction may well involve questions of fact as well as questions on law .
"\r\n   Similarly, the court may well be at a disadvantage in deciding issues of foreign law in the absence of oral evidence and cross-examination of the expert lawyers .
Moreover, given that the finding of Mr Davies as to the partisanship of Azov\'s expert cannot in any way bind the court, it is, I think, desirable, where there may well be submissions before the court as to the helpfulness of that expert\'s evidence, that the court should have the advantage of hearing his oral evidence for itself.\r\n   As for the question of costs and security for costs although Baltic, as claimant in the arbitration, could not be secured for the costs of the hearing below, when, however, it comes to Azov\'s challenge, Baltic would, I suppose, be entitled to make, if so advised, an application for security for costs that arise on the hearing under section 67 .
Undoubtedly costs will be increased by an oral hearing and that hearing will take somewhat longer, perhaps some 50 per cent longer than it would have taken without oral evidence.\r\n   It may also delay the time when a hearing is fixed to come on, where that hearing may last for, let us say, some three days rather than a day and a half or two days .
Nevertheless, and although there may be some prejudice to the expeditious and economical disposal of the application by permitting oral evidence, it seems to me that the justice of the matter requires that I accede to Azov\'s application .
Ultimately a question of justice, where it conflicts with a modest prejudice to expedition or increase in cost, must be given greater weight .
For these reasons I accede to Azov\'s application, that, in what would in any event be a weighty application, oral evidence should be permitted.\r\n   MR FLYNN:\tMy Lord, I am very grateful indeed .
I would firstly point out the practice direction of Colman J and it seems to me that this judgment is the very one of the judgments that he refers to where ".. .
The judge of the commercial court will endeavour so far as possible to consistency in matters of construction of both the Act and the new order 73 .
In order to facilitate consistency of approach arrangements have been made for decisions on matters of construction application to be circulated between the judges immediately they are given and then distributing them to practitioners" .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tYes .
MR FLYNN:\tI do not know, my Lord, whether given the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the  Imperial Tobacco  case whether it is necessary to direct that this judgment be deemed delivered in open court .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tNo, I think it is the other way now .
MR FLYNN:\tYes, I think it probably is .
But if it is necessary I would ask your Lordship to direct it under order 32 rule 13  .
My Lord, the second point is costs .
This is a discrete issue, we would ask for our costs in this application .
The only other question is the further directions .
Your Lordship indicated that, as I understood it, that it might be helpful, given my indication that we would like to lead in chief, would that be put in -- the leading be put in writing, if that is the case, obviously, we will need some time to do that .
Subject to that, what we would say is 21 days to do that, then the normal directions apply, apart from reply evidence, which we would ask for an extension from seven to 21 .
But those are the only submissions I have .
MR SMITH:\tMy Lord, in reverse order, I have been thinking about it while I have been listening to my learned friend, if we are both calling evidence again, the first time round was exchange of evidence, and if we are going to, as it were, put our questions in chief in those supplementary statements, it may be more appropriate, and it may not be contentious, but what there should be is an exchange of supplementary witness statements followed by an exchange of supplementary experts\' reports, so it takes direction -- MR JUSTICE RIX:\tWas there supplementary evidence from the factual witnesses as well as the expert witnesses .
MR SMITH:\tYes, my Lord, briefly .
If may be appropriate if the matter as my learned friend has fairly described, effectively, as a rehearing, as a trial, the directions took effect as they would do then, so that there should simply be an order for mutual exchange of supplementary witness statements followed by a mutual exchange of supplementary experts\' reports .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tI would like to think that is right .
MR FLYNN:\tWe are very content with that .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tI am inclined to give the shortest possible sensible times for that since this is a run that you have already done .
I am inclined to say 14 days for factual... MR FLYNN:\tMy Lord, the only thing I would say is I know that my solicitor would be very anxious because he took the statements last time round by actually going to the Ukraine and we would ask for 21 days .
MR SMITH:\tMy Lord, I think that is -- 21 and then 21 again .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tCould one do factual and expert at the same time or would you want to have a... MR FLYNN:\tWe would want to have a break .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\t21 plus 21 .
MR FLYNN:\tYes .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tSo be it .
21 days mutual exchange, factual supplementary statements, 21 days after that mutual exchanges of experts\' supplementary statements .
Otherwise automatic directions, in effect, are they not .
MR SMITH:\tMy Lord, on reporting, I think we are with your Lordship on that, it is not necessary to make an order, but we certainly would not oppose if it was necessary .
My Lord, on costs, I appreciate there has been a discrete issue here today, but there would have had to be a directions hearing in any event .
I appreciate we have lost, but what we do say to your Lordship is that it is an appropriate case where it has troubled your Lordship, it is a new point, it was a point that was proper to be ventilated, but it should be costs in the application .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tDo you want to say anything further about that .
MR FLYNN:\tMy Lord, it is not a run of the mill directions application .
The time was extended at Baltic\'s request .
Your Lordship has given a very reasonable judgment, we have succeeded, they have lost, we would ask for costs .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tI will say costs in the application .
MR SMITH:\tMy Lord, can I briefly and finally trouble your Lordship on one matter, echoing what my learned friend said about the desirability of emanating this judgment, my Lord, we would ask your Lordship for leave to appeal on what does seem to us to be a fundamental point of principle under the new Act as to the effect of not availing yourself of the section 72 option and whether that really does, as we say, mean that you have limited yourself .
We do say, as your Lordship said in giving a slightly longer judgment than normal, it is a very important point that would be appropriate for consideration .
MR FLYNN:\tMy Lord, on that point I am not sure, I was looking up myself whether if we lost we could appeal .
I am not sure it is possible, my Lord, but I will not take that point, because if your Lordship deals with the application it is not possible then it certainly saves time .
What I would say is even if it is possible to appeal from this judgment this ought to be a matter to be dealt with by the Court of Appeal .
If they consider that your Lordship\'s judgment requires any interference then they can give leave themselves .
MR JUSTICE RIX:\tThat is my view .
If it is possible to appeal I refuse leave and you will have to go to the Court of Appeal.  .
b'Mr Justice Rix : Preface \tUntil two settlement agreements, one reached in the course of trial and the other arrived at only after a draft judgment had been distributed to the parties, these proceedings had been concerned principally with a claim by the plaintiff to recover monies from those who, as it was alleged, had knowingly, ie dishonestly, received funds deriving from, and/or had assisted in, a breach of fiduciary duty .
Secondarily and contingently, there were contribution proceedings involving defendants and third parties as to how any liabilities to the plaintiffs should be apportioned .
\tIn the event, but only as the clock was moving towards the twelfth hour, the principal proceedings were finally settled .
It has been agreed that, in the light of the history of this matter, my draft judgment should be amended to record and take account of that settlement, as well as certain other matters arising in the contribution proceedings which depended on the valuation of the settlements and the calculation of interest and which were argued before me or in subsequent written submissions in the light of my draft: but that otherwise my judgment should be perfected as though the settlement of the plaintiff\'s claim had not taken place .
In particular, it was recognised and agreed that, despite the settlement, it was too late to seek to turn the clock back on the findings that I had made as a result of trial: too late, for instance, to alter the basis of those findings from being findings on the evidence to being assumptions on the pleadings .
[1]  The parties recognised that those findings had to be made in any event for the purpose of the contribution proceedings .
\tIn the circumstances, the judgment which I now publish is that which I drafted, amended to take account of that last minute settlement and of the further submissions relating to the contribution proceedings, but otherwise left as far as possible untouched .
Introduction \tThe plaintiff in these proceedings was Dubai Aluminium Company Limited ("Dubal") .
It claimed to recover the otherwise unrecovered balance of payments totalling US$50,117,622 disbursed in the form of commissions and other like payments under a consultancy agreement made with Marc Rich & Co AG ("Richco") dated 1 September 1987 (the "Richco consultancy agreement") .
In a nutshell, Dubal alleged that its former chief executive, Mr Ian Livingstone, conspired with Mr Hany Salaam, the first defendant, with the assistance of the latter\'s solicitor Mr Anthony Amhurst, the second defendant, to steal this sum under the  guise of sham contracts for the purported provision of commercial services .
The alleged scheme (the "scheme") was for the stolen monies to be paid out by Dubal to Richco under the Richco consultancy agreement and then onpaid by Richco under subsidiary consultancy agreements made between Richco and companies which were the creatures of Mr Salaam (the "subsidiary agreements") .
I shall adopt the conveniently short expression "scheme", somewhat pejorative as it is, to refer to the transaction or series of transactions brought into existence and evidenced by the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements, irrespective of whether it was a dishonest scheme, as Dubal alleged, or an honest scheme, as the defendants alleged, because the expression was so used, as a matter of convenience, at trial, because circumlocutions to describe the transactions in terms which reflected the parties\' respective evidence and submissions would create difficulties, and also because Dubal\'s preferred talk of "theft", even in the phrase "alleged theft", is of course even more tendentious .
Dubal\'s business, as its full name implies, is the operation of an aluminium smelter in Dubai .
\tMr Livingstone was not a defendant to these proceedings because  an earlier action brought by Dubal in this court in 1995 against him (and his wife and companies) in respect of not only the scheme presently complained of but also other matters arising out of the period of his office with Dubal ended in an agreement dated 31 January 1996 under which he paid to Dubal, while denying liability, some $15,540,000 in full and final settlement of all Dubal\'s claims .
Dubal alleged that $6,327,918.09 of that settlement was to be referred to the scheme, being the alleged total of all sums received by Mr Livingstone pursuant to it .
Dubal\'s claim in this action started out therefore in the sum of the remaining balance of $43,789,703.91 (ie $50,117,622 less $6,327,918.09), together with interest and costs .
I shall refer to this settlement as the Livingstone settlement .
\tThat balance fell again when in the course of trial Mr Amhurst and his partners in the partnerships of Amhurst Brown Martin & Nicholson ("ABMN", the third defendants) and Amhurst Brown Colombotti ("ABC", the fourth defendants) settled with Dubal, on terms providing for the payment of $10,000,000 to Dubal by ABMN and ABC and the withdrawal of all allegations against Mr Amhurst and the partnerships by Dubal .
Mr Amhurst had been sued on the basis that he had knowingly assisted in the scheme, but (as was ultimately conceded) had received none of its proceeds .
The partnerships had been sued on the basis that they were vicariously liable under section 10 of the Partnership Act 1890 .
[2]   I shall refer where it is convenient to do so to Mr Amhurst, ABMN and ABC compendiously as the "Amhurst defendants" .
I shall refer to this settlement as the Amhurst settlement .
\tThe remaining defendants whom I have not so far mentioned were Nillet Development Incorporated ("Nillet", the fifth defendants) and Japan Metal Sales Corporation ("JMS", the sixth defendants), both Panamanian companies which at all relevant times had been, as Mr Salaam accepted, his alter egos .
They were two of the four companies with which Richco entered into subsidiary agreements pursuant to the Richco consultancy agreement .
The other two companies were Valo Developments Inc ("Valo") and Wid Enterprises Inc ("Wid"), also both Panamanian corporations .
As it happened, no sums were paid under the scheme to Wid, which is why it had not also been made a defendant; and Valo, although the recipient of funds under the scheme, had been dissolved on 3 October 1991, which is why it had not been made a defendant .
I shall refer to Mr Salaam, Nillet and JMS, when it is convenient to refer to them compendiously, as the "Salaam defendants" .
\tMr Livingstone, although not a defendant because of his settlement with Dubal, is a party to these proceedings as first third party .
He was so joined in these proceedings by the Amhurst defendants .
\tThere are two other third parties, each of whom might perhaps have been made defendants at the suit of Dubal, but had not .
One is Richco itself, the second third party, now, following a management buy-out, renamed Glencore International AG .
I shall nevertheless continue to call that company Richco .
Dubal had reached its own accommodations with Richco, is still in business relations with it, and made no allegations against it in these proceedings .
Indeed, it had granted Richco indemnities against any loss, liability or expense, including costs, which Richco might suffer by reason of its involvement in this action, and had itself relied on the evidence, called by Richco, of Mr William Strothotte, the architect of the management buy-out and now Richco\'s chief executive .
The reason why Richco had been brought into these proceedings was that first the Amhurst defendants, and next the Salaam defendants served third party notices on it, saying in effect that if, which was denied, there was any validity in Dubal\'s claim, then Richco too was a knowing participant in the scheme and ought to contribute to any ultimate liability .
As part of the Amhurst settlement in the course of trial, it was also agreed that the Amhurst defendants would drop their third party claim against Richco .
From that point, only the Salaam defendants maintained a claim that Richco was knowingly and therefore dishonestly implicated in the scheme .
\tThe other third party who might have been made a defendant, but had not, was the third third party, His Excellency Mr Mahdi Mohamed Al Tajir .
He undoubtedly, and on his own admission, received sums of money which flowed from Dubal via Richco by reason of the Richco consultancy agreement .
In that respect he is perhaps like Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, who both acknowledged that they shared in such funds, albeit said that they did so honestly .
He seeks, however, to distance himself from Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone in at least three respects .
First, he disputes and rejects Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Livingstone\'s explanation for the scheme, and their principal defence as to the honesty of it, that it was legitimately authorised by him as the right hand man and confidant of the Ruler of Dubai and ultimate owner of Dubal .
He says that he did not authorise the scheme, and was no longer in a position of state where he could do so .
Secondly,  his explanation for the receipt of such funds as he received is that he agreed with Mr Marc Rich, at that time (in or about May 1987) the principal shareholder and director of Richco, a personal commission for himself, payable by Richco out of its own funds,  for bringing about a commercial alliance between Dubal and Richco .
Thirdly, he contrasts the manner in which Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone received such funds, via JMS under the subsidiary agreements and/or into secret accounts, with the manner in which he says he received all his funds, viz directly from Richco and openly into an account in the name of Al Tajir Ltd.  \tAs I have said, Dubal had not made Mr Al Tajir a defendant .
He has become a party to these proceedings only because the Amhurst defendants and the Salaam defendants have, as in the case of Richco, served third party notices against him as well, making a similar claim to contribution on the alternative basis that, if they are liable as knowing participants in the scheme, then he was himself a knowing participant too .
There was some limited discussion before me as to why Dubal had not made Mr Al Tajir a defendant .
After all, in opening his case on behalf of Dubal, Mr Richard Seymour QC expressly referred to Mr Al Tajir\'s role as "that of another villain" .
[3]  Similarly, in final submissions Mr Seymour developed this thesis .
Why, in that case, did not Dubal sue Mr Tajir .
What if any inferences is it proper for me to draw from Dubal\'s failure to do so .
In sum it appears that Dubal did, on learning from Richco\'s discovery in about June 1997 that Mr Al Tajir had been a recipient of funds from Richco in connection with the consultancy agreement, go so far as to issue a summons on 1 July 1997 for the purpose of joining Mr Al Tajir as seventh defendant and of amending its points of claim as a consequence .
That summons was not, in the event, pursued .
It seems to me that I cannot ultimately be sufficiently confident as to the reasons why Dubal did not sue Mr Al Tajir to be able to draw a safe inference from its failure to do so .
I bear in mind, of course, that it did not do so .
The facts are, however, that not only had Mr Al Tajir\'s participation in the scheme and his honesty been directly in issue by reason of the Salaam defendants\' and the Amhurst defendants\' third party notices; but also a critical issue, perhaps the most important single issue, in Dubal\'s claim and not merely in the third party proceedings had been whether Mr Al Tajir had authorised the scheme whereby the funds generated by the Richco consultancy agreement were to be shared among the participants in the scheme (as Mr Salaam had alleged, relying on that authority, or honest belief in that authority, as existing and being legitimate, as a defence to any allegation against him of dishonest receipt or assistance), or whether, as Mr Al Tajir alleged, he did not .
Dubal also alleged that he did not authorise the scheme, but with this difference .
Dubal agreed that he had no legitimate position or power to authorise the scheme; but otherwise it did not ultimately take issue with Mr Salaam\'s (and Mr Livingstone\'s) evidence that Mr Al Tajir was a party to it .
Mr Al Tajir, on the other hand, said that not only did he have no position or power to authorise such a scheme on behalf of Dubal and the Ruler of Dubai, but also that he did not seek to do so at all, whether with or without legitimate authority: he did not participate in the scheme at all, but merely negotiated with Richco a legitimate business commission for himself .
\tI should also mention in this introduction Mr Saad Salaam, Mr Salaam\'s brother .
It had emerged in Richco\'s (and Mr Amhurst\'s) discovery and also in the witness statements of the parties, that Mr Saad Salaam also participated in the proceeds of the scheme, albeit not initially .
There came a point, however, quite early on, when he laid claim to a share of his brother\'s income from the scheme .
The brothers were not on speaking terms, and it was left to Mr Al Tajir to broker an arrangement .
In due course what happened was that both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone each gave up one quarter of their respective shares of the principal income stream from the scheme .
This income stream was 2.5% of the value of all sales of Dubal\'s products .
Mr Salaam (when I speak simply of Mr Salaam I intend to refer to the defendant, Mr Hany Salaam) initially received 30% of that income, as did Mr Livingstone .
After his accommodation, Mr Saad Salaam received 15%, and Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Livingstone\'s shares were reduced ultimately to 22.5% each .
In the result Mr Saad Salaam received $6,001,861 in his account at Banque Gutzwiller .
\tApart from the third party proceedings described above, there was also a third party notice served by the Amhurst defendants against Mr Livingstone (but no third party claim was brought against him by the Salaam defendants) .
There were also  contribution notices served by the Salaam defendants against the Amhurst defendants, and vice versa .
Mr Al Tajir originally brought no proceedings for a contribution, but at a late stage made a contingent claim on Mr Amhurst .
Mr Livingstone brought no proceedings for a contribution, although there came a moment during the trial when he trembled on the brink of doing so .
That was on the eve of Mr Livingstone\'s oral evidence, when his solicitors sent a letter to the solicitors acting for Richco to inform them that Mr Livingstone would invite the court to apportion contribution between the third parties, should the Amhurst defendants\' third party claim against him succeed .
However, a few days later, while Mr Livingstone was still being cross-examined, I was informed that that claim for contribution had been withdrawn .
\tThe structure of the dispute argued before me can therefore be encapsulated as follows .
Dubal, having paid out between 4 September 1987 and 11 February 1993 a total of $50,117,622 and recovered $15,540,000 from Mr Livingstone (out of which it gave credit in these proceedings for only $6,327,918) in 1996 and a further $10,000,000 from the Amhurst defendants (out of which it gave credit for $9,250,000 and referred the balance of $750,000 to costs) during the course of trial, made the following financial claims against the Salaam defendants: \t(1) against Mr Salaam himself:  \t\t- in knowing assistance: $50,117,622 plus interest and costs (less a credit of $15,577,918); \t\t- in knowing receipt: $27,848,149.61 etc .
\t(2) against Nillet: \t\t- in knowing receipt: $2,975,000 etc.\t\t\t   \t(3) against JMS: \t\t- in knowing receipt: $14,272,846.61 etc.\t \tThe figure of $27,848,149.61 put against Mr Salaam in knowing receipt is the total of the alleged receipts of Mr Salaam and his companies, Nillet, JMS and Valo .
Dubal made no formal claim against Mr Al Tajir or Mr Saad Salaam, but submitted on the evidence before me that the former was a full participant in the dishonest scheme and received $15,604,877.10 out of the $50,117,622 disbursed .
The essence of its case was that Mr Livingstone breached his fiduciary duty as a director and chief executive of Dubal in promoting and participating in the scheme, that Mr Salaam (and Mr Al Tajir) were also involved in promoting and participating in the scheme, and in sharing in its rewards .
It said that Mr Al Tajir had no authority from the Ruler of Dubai to advance the scheme, and that Mr Salaam\'s reliance on such authority was not merely misplaced but dishonest .
It submitted that the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements were sham agreements in that the parties to them did not contemplate that the services stipulated under them would be provided in return for the payments stipulated in them, so that they were merely, or at any rate in very large part, a device for extracting money from Dubal .
Nevertheless, Dubal made no allegations of dishonesty against Richco, having reached its own accommodation with it, and indeed by reason of the indemnities given to Richco had in any event promised to pay for any liability or loss Richco might suffer by reason of these proceedings .
It began the trial by alleging that Mr Amhurst was guilty of knowing assistance in the scheme (having dropped as against him any claim of knowing receipt), but by reason of the Amhurst settlement had withdrawn all such allegations .
\tMr Salaam, on the other hand, said that the scheme was honest in its conception and execution; that it was intended to benefit Dubal by bringing to it a commercial alliance with the largest and strongest metal trader in the world, Richco, and that that alliance has continued to this day; that it was promoted to Mr Salaam by Mr Al Tajir himself, with all the prestige and authority that he exercised formally as Director of the Office of the Ruler of Dubai\'s Affairs or less formally but equally effectively as the real and acknowledged protector in Dubai of Dubal\'s interests; that the income earned by him and his companies from the scheme was essentially a reward for securing for Dubal its alliance with Richco, and that custom and practice in Dubai in such matters exonerated him from any accusation of dishonesty; that Mr Al Tajir\'s participation in the scheme was likewise a guarantee of its legitimacy, as Mr Amhurst\'s involvement as a well-known City of London solicitor in the drafting and execution of the documents and in the implementation of the scheme was itself proof of its bona fides .
He emphasised the long history of his and his companies\' business support for Dubal and expertise, in the light of which it was, he felt, only natural that Mr Al Tajir, Dubal and Richco should have involved him and wanted to retain his involvement in the commercial alliance .
Mr Salaam gave evidence and faced cross-examination in support of his case .
\tMr Amhurst\'s pleaded case was to the effect that he was only acting as a solicitor, knew nothing to put him on notice of any dishonesty in the promotion or execution of the scheme, and derived no benefit from it, other than his firm\'s legitimate fees and expenses .
The absence of any benefit, he submitted, was itself a proof of honesty .
He was entitled to say that under the settlement agreement all allegations against him had been withdrawn .
He did not personally contribute to the payment of $10,000,000 to Dubal, all of which was met by his partners in ABMN and ABC .
He did not give evidence, because the settlement agreement forestalled the need to do so .
\tMr Livingstone\'s case was similar to that of Mr Salaam, but more ambivalent .
He regarded Mr Al Tajir as clothed with the authority of the Ruler of Dubai and liaised with him generally regarding Dubal\'s affairs as the Ruler\'s representative .
It was he, Mr Livingstone, who identified the need for a commercial alliance between Dubal and Richco .
With Mr Al Tajir\'s approval, Mr Salaam assisted him to negotiate that alliance, which was in the commercial interests of Dubal .
The Richco consultancy agreement was part of a strategy and a package of transactions which embraced an Alumina Supply Agreement (the "ASA"), also dated 1 September 1987 and made with Richco\'s subsidiary Clarendon Limited, which was designed to safeguard Dubal\'s supplies of raw material, and in due course led in 1989 to a Pre-Sales Agreement, under which Richco advanced $250 million to Dubal against Dubal\'s forward sales of aluminium to Richco over the next five years .
Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam required payment for their assistance in promoting the Richco alliance, and it was Mr Al Tajir who agreed the division of the income generated by the scheme between himself, Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, and subsequently Mr Saad Salaam .
He regarded his own share of the income not as something that he had stipulated for but as in the gift of Mr Al Tajir, and as reflecting the customary method in Dubai of rewarding good service .
He was, however, ambivalent about the honesty of such payments .
He had of course settled with Dubal even before these current proceedings were commenced, and had done so without serving a defence to Dubal\'s action against him .
In his witness statement, which became his evidence in chief before me, he said this: "What happened in Dubal from 1992 onwards [when the Richco consultancy agreement came under question, a process which culminated in Mr Livingstone leaving Dubai in October 1992 and in Dubal giving notice to Richco of the termination of the agreement on 22 March 1993] was the phenomenon well-known in autocratic feudal regimes; namely a "changing of the guard" .
Those around the Ruler change and the first objective of the new regime is to discredit everything done by the old one .
However, it is only the players who change; the game remains the same. .
\tIn his cross-examination, he presented two separate faces .
First, he acceded to questions to the effect that the payments under the scheme had been dishonest .
When, however, he resumed his cross-examination after the intervention of a weekend, he insisted that in the light of the custom and practice prevailing in Dubai and on the basis that what had been done had been properly authorised by Mr Al Tajir, the scheme and the payments made under it were not dishonest .
\tMr Al Tajir\'s evidence, however, was that he had ceased to be Director of the Ruler\'s Affairs in 1981, and thereafter had no formal role in the government of Dubai or in the administration of Dubal .
His interest in Dubal thereafter was purely that of an interested and informed private businessman .
The approach regarding an alliance with Richco had come from Mr Livingstone, who asked him to contact Marc Rich personally .
Marc Rich was a neighbour in St Moritz and good friend .
He did contact him, and agreed with Mr Rich that he would receive from Richco 1% of the value of the transaction, however it might be structured .
Independently, Mr Livingstone had also approached Mr Salaam on the subject of the alliance: he explained this to Mr Al Tajir as being useful for the negotiation and implementation of the alliance .
Mr Al Tajir asked Mr Livingstone to clear the matter with Sheikh Hamdan, one of the Ruler\'s sons and chairman of Dubal .
He had no knowledge of the payments made to Mr Salaam or Mr Livingstone, or of any dishonesty, until he heard of Dubal\'s action against Mr Livingstone .
He had not even realised that payments related to the Richco alliance had been arriving into the account of Al Tajir Limited .
I was told that Mr Al Tajir had been intending to give evidence in person: at the last moment, however, he was unable to do so, for he was taken into hospital with chest pains, for examination and rest .
I was provided with a letter from his cardiologist explaining the matter .
In the circumstances, his witness statement was admitted as his evidence, but there was no opportunity to test it by cross-examination .
\tRichco\'s case was supported, so far as evidence went, by Mr Willy Strotthote .
In 1987 he had been head of metals and minerals trading at Richco .
He said that he had not been party to the initial meeting that Mr Rich had had with the scheme\'s promoters, but that he was given instructions to put into operation a project for a commercial alliance under which most of the monies payable in the first place to Richco would flow through under subsidiary agreements into the hands of other parties .
It was his understanding that the scheme had the approval, through Mr Al Tajir, of the Dubai government .
He regarded the Richco consultancy agreement as a genuine agreement, at any rate so far as that portion of the monies payable by Dubal which would remain with Richco was concerned: he put that portion at half of the 2.5% 2commission payable on all Dubal\'s sales, viz 1.25%, in return for which Richco was to provide, and did provide, genuine consultancy services .
The subsidiary agreements, on the other hand, were "a cosmetic arrangement", mere "vehicles for payment", under which there was never any question of any performance being required on the part of Richco\'s contract partners .
He recognised that Nillet, JMS, Valo and Wid were mere front companies for the ultimate beneficiaries of such payments, but he said that he did not know who those beneficiaries were .
He was assured by Mr Livingstone and Mr Amhurst that the commercial alliance had to be structured in this way in order to be acceptable to Dubal .
It was his understanding, in reliance on Mr Livingstone\'s executive authority, Mr Al Tajir\'s political standing and the involvement of a reputable London solicitor, Mr Amhurst (whom he regarded as acting for Dubal rather than Mr Salaam), that the scheme had the approval of Dubal and the government of Dubai .
Mr Strothotte was called to give evidence on behalf of Richco, but, because his evidence was also relied on by Dubal, he was not cross-examined on behalf of Dubal .
\tIt had been agreed between the parties, and so ordered, that the trial would take place in two parts .
In the first part, all evidence which any of the parties might wish to call whether relevant to the main action or the third party and contribution proceedings would be called, and submissions would be made so far as was relevant to the main action, but not so far as the third party and contribution proceedings were concerned .
It was contemplated that submissions in the latter proceedings could not conveniently be addressed, in effect would have to be addressed on too many possible contingencies all of which would be unnecessary if I found wholly in favour of the defendants, for those submissions to take place at the same time as submissions in the main action .
It was therefore contemplated that, when my findings of fact over the whole spectrum of the evidence and my decisions in the main action were known, the parties would then proceed, if necessary, to a second hearing for the purpose of submissions in the third party and contribution proceedings .
\tAt the end of the first part of the trial, however, I proposed to the parties for their consideration a procedure which might be more convenient to them .
I proposed making, after a short adjournment of a day or two, what I termed "unreasoned findings" as to the liability of the defendants and as to the honesty of all parties whose honesty was in issue .
Armed with those findings, the parties could then proceed to draw up written submissions so that the second part of the trial, dealing with contribution, could take place promptly .
That proposal was adopted by the parties .
In the circumstances I published my "Unreasoned Findings" on 6 November 1997, and heard further submissions in the contribution proceedings one week later .
\tIn my "Unreasoned Findings" I found as follows:  Mr Ian Livingstone (the First Third Party) was in breach of his fiduciary duties as Chief Executive of Dubai Aluminium Company ("Dubal") in connection with the promotion and organisation and operation of a scheme, involving the making and operation of the Richco Consultancy Agreement and the Subsidiary Agreements (collectively the "Agreements"), for the payment of monies to be derived from Dubal, routed through Marc Rich & Co AG ("Richco", the Second Third Party, now known as Glencore International AG) and paid to participants in the scheme (the "scheme"); and in so doing dishonestly received US$6,327,918.09 as one of the participants .
The consequence of his breach(es) of fiduciary duty was the loss to Dubal of a gross sum of $50,117,622.\r\n    Mr Hany Salaam (the First Defendant) dishonestly assisted Mr Livingstone in that breach of fiduciary duty by participating in the promotion, organisation and operation of the scheme .
His dishonest assistance led to the whole of the gross loss to Dubal of $50,117,662 .
He, either personally or through his companies Nillet Development Incorporated ("Nillet") and Japan Metal Sales Corporation ("JMS"), the Fifth and Sixth Defendants, dishonestly received $21,846,488.39 as a participant in the scheme .
\r\n    Nillet dishonestly received $2,975,000 .
JMS dishonestly received $8,270,985.33 .
\r\n    Mr Anthony Amhurst (the Second Defendant) and the firms of Amhurst Brown Martin & Nicholson ("ABMN", the Third Defendants) and Amhurst Brown Colombotti ("ABC", the Fourth Defendants) have settled Dubal\'s claims against them on terms providing for the payment of $10,000,000 to Dubal and the withdrawal of all allegations against them .
I am informed that Mr Amhurst is making no contribution to that payment, and that the whole of the $10,000,000 is to be provided by ABMN and ABC .
For the purposes of any contribution proceedings I must assume, in accordance with section 1(4) of the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 that the factual basis of the claim made against Mr Amhurst could have been established .
There remains, I am told, an issue as to whether, on the factual basis pleaded in Dubal\'s claim, ABMN and ABC would have been liable.\r\n      H.E .
Mr Mohamed Al Tajir (the Third Third Party) dishonestly assisted Mr Livingstone in the latter\'s breach of fiduciary duty by participating in the promotion, organisation and operation of the scheme .
He dishonestly received $15,604,878.04 as a participant .
\r\n    Mr Tajir did not have authority, whether actual or ostensible, from the Ruler of Dubai at the relevant time, HH Sheikh Rashid, nor from the Government of Dubai nor from the ultimate owners of Dubal, to authorise the scheme or the Agreements or the payments made under them, and there was no honest belief by any of the participants in such authority.\r\n    Richco dishonestly assisted Mr Livingstone in his breach of fiduciary duty by participating in the organisation and operation of the scheme .
All of the gross sum of $50,117,622 was paid to Richco .
Richco in turn paid a total of $49,780,944 to the participants (or at their direction) under the Subsidiary Agreements, either (up to 23.1.91) out of sums already received under the Richco Consultancy Agreement ("RCA") or (in respect of the capitalised payments referred to in paragraph 8 below) out of such sums as well as in anticipation of sums to be received under the RCA and secured by means of a Performance Bond dated 18 February 1991 .
\r\n    Under the Agreements Richco was in effect to retain up to one fifth (20%) of the fee of 2.5% on the value of all sales of Dubal\'s products provided for under the Agreements .
However, by reason of the capitalised payments made to the participants in discharge of the Subsidiary Agreements in March/April 1991 combined with the early termination of the RCA as of 22 March 1993, Richco had by that termination date received $50,117,944 under the RCA and paid to or at the direction of the participants $49,780,944 under the Subsidiary Agreements.\r\n      In ordinary circumstances Richco would have been entitled to charge Dubal a fee in return for services rendered under the RCA, and one fifth of 2.5%, ie 0.5%, of the value of all sales of Dubal\'s products would have been a reasonable and legitimate fee .
In the absence of any documentary evidence of the provision of such services, however, it is impossible to find that any such services were in fact provided or to evaluate the value of such services if perchance any were .
No services were expected to be rendered to Richco under the Subsidiary Agreements, nor were they .
In the context of the scheme as a whole, the margin of 0.5% to be earned by Richco under the RCA and the Subsidiary Agreements cannot be regarded as a legitimate fee rather than the price demanded by Richco or allocated to Richco for Richco\'s participation in the scheme.\r\n    Each of Mr Livingstone, Mr Salaam, Mr Amhurst, Mr Al Tajir and Richco were participants in the scheme, and Mr Amhurst must be treated as dishonestly assisting the scheme in his role as a solicitor .
Their relative responsibility falls to be debated further in the contribution proceedings .
Subject to such further submissions, I find that each of them played an important and substantial, and not merely peripheral or incidental, role in the scheme .
Alone of them, however, Mr Amhurst received nothing by reason of his assistance - other than the professional fees paid to his firm in respect of his work .
\r\n    In March 1995 Dubal commenced proceedings against Mr Livingstone in respect of claims arising out of the scheme as well as other claims .
Those proceedings were settled by the payment to Dubal of what Dubal concedes to be (some) $15,540,000 .
The settlement agreement makes no allocation of any part of that sum as between the claims common to the Livingstone and the present proceedings on the one hand and other claims on the other hand .
Dubal gives credit to Mr Salaam in respect of that settlement in the sum of $6,327,918.09, thus reducing their claim in knowing assistance against Mr Salaam from the gross sum of $50,117,622 to $43,789,703.91; but Dubal has failed to prove that the admitted recovery arising out of the Livingstone settlement is to be limited to the sum of $6,327,918.09.\r\n    I find Dubal\'s claim in knowing assistance against Mr Salaam to be made good in the sum of $43,789,703.91 plus interest less a credit to be given in respect of the balance of the recovery under the Livingstone settlement in the sum of $9,212,081.91 and less also the sum of $10,000,000 to be received under the Amhurst settlement .
Interest will itself have to be adjusted to take account of the timing of the respective payments under the settlements.\r\n    Dubal\'s alternative claims in knowing receipt prima facie succeed as against Mr Salaam in the sum of $21,846,488.39, as against Nillet in the sum of $2,975,000 and as against JMS in the sum of $8,270,985.33, plus interest .
There may have to be further submissions as to the interrelationship of the various liabilities and credits.\r\n   \tOn the occasion of the further submissions on contribution, the Amhurst defendants, who at the first part of the trial had been represented by a single team of solicitors and barristers spearheaded by Mr Anthony Boswood QC, were now in a position where Mr Amhurst himself and ABMN/ABC had to be separately represented .
Only ABMN and ABC had contributed to the payment of monies under the settlement agreement with Dubal, and therefore only ABMN and ABC were in the position of claiming a contribution from others .
Mr Amhurst, who on this occasion was represented by Mr George Leggatt QC, was facing claims for contribution from the Salaam defendants .
\tThe essential structure of the contribution claims can be summarised as follows .
The Salaam defendants sought contribution from the Amhurst defendants, Richco and Mr Al Tajir (but not from Mr Livingstone) .
ABMN and ABC (other than Mr Amhurst) sought contribution from the Salaam defendants, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir (but not from Richco) .
The third parties (Mr Livingstone, Richco and Mr Al Tajir) did not seek contribution from anyone, save that late in the trial Mr Al Tajir formulated a contingent claim against Mr Amhurst .
\tAt the time of the further submissions on contribution, I was informed by Mr Malek QC, on behalf of Mr Al Tajir, that a settlement between Mr Al Tajir and Dubal was likely .
This subsequently came to fruition while I was preparing my judgment and I was informed of it .
It provides for the payment of $18 million by Mr Al Tajir to Dubal, in three instalments of $6 million each, the first on 31 January 1998, the second on 31 December 1998 and the third on 31 December 1999 .
The payment is expressed to be "in full and final settlement of the claims against the Third Third Party in respect of the subject matter of the Action" and to be inclusive of interest and costs .
Dubal agreed that it would upon signature of the settlement agreement give credit in the sum of $18 million against its claims in these proceedings against the Salaam defendants .
The effect of this settlement, therefore, was that, for instance in the case of Mr Salaam, Dubal\'s claim had at that time fallen to: $50,117,622 plus interest and costs less $6,327,918.09 (the Livingstone settlement), $9,250,000 (the Amhurst settlement) and then $18,000,000 (the Al Tajir settlement) .
\tFinally, there came the last of all the settlements, which I shall refer to as the Salaam settlement .
At that time the Salaam defendants were of course the only outstanding defendants in the proceedings .
Just as I was completing my judgment and preparing to put the parties on notice to stand by for its distribution in draft, I was asked if I would be willing to postpone judgment to enable Dubal and the Salaam defendants to reach agreement, if they could .
Having consulted all the parties, I agreed, since they all wished me to do so, to postpone judgment for a defined time .
At the end of that period, having heard that no settlement had been reached, I gave notice that I would distribute my draft judgment: the parties had informed me that they would in any event wish to address me further on interest rates, which was relevant inter alia to my final dispositions in the contribution proceedings .
I was then requested, again with the consent of all the parties, to grant a further period to enable Dubal and the Salaam defendants to reach a settlement .
When that further time expired, my draft judgment was distributed .
The Salaam settlement then occurred, on the eve of the appointed hearing and became unconditional on the morning of the hearing, 1 June 1998 .
At that hearing the consequences of that settlement was discussed, and it was agreed as I have already mentioned that, despite that settlement and thus the conclusion of the primary proceedings, my judgment should be perfected nevertheless, with only such minimal changes as were necessary to refer to the Salaam settlement and to take it into account .
There were also at that time further submissions on interest rates and their ramifications .
I shall revert to the latter below, when I come to the contribution proceedings .
\tThe Salaam settlement was in the total sum of $18,000,000 in full and final settlement of all Dubal\'s claims against the Salaam defendants in this action .
Of that sum, $3,000,000 had already been paid on 2 April 1998, a further $6,000,000 was paid on 1 June 1998 itself, a further $3,000,000 was to be paid within 90 days of 27 May 1998 - by my calculation by 25 August 1998, and the final instalment of $6,000,000 was to be paid by 31 December 1999 .
\tI was also then informed that, as part of that settlement, the Salaam defendants had dropped their third party claim against Richco .
There was no other third party claim against Richco .
As it happened, I had made no financial disposition against Richco in my draft judgment: consequently there was nothing in substance to amend in that respect .
It was, nevertheless, submitted on behalf of Richco that findings, or at any rate some findings, that I had already made concerning Richco should be treated as assumptions rather than findings .
It seems to me that that was unrealistic .
It was accepted by Richco that my Unreasoned Findings would have to stand in any event .
My judgment explains those Findings .
The findings that I make, upon all the evidence I have heard, are inextricably interconnected .
In order to do justice between the parties in the contribution proceedings I have in any event had to apportion responsibility between the various parties .
\tBefore returning to explain my reasons for the decisions which I notified to the parties at the end of the first part of the trial, I need to set out the background facts in further detail .
\tI shall begin, out of chronological sequence, but having regard for the central place which they play in the story, with the terms of the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements themselves .
The Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements \tThe Richco consultancy agreement begins with a preamble which seeks to explain the agreement\'s commercial logic .
Since such matters are relied upon in support of the genuineness of the scheme, I set them out: \t"WHEREAS RICHCO: \tpossesses the world\'s largest multi-source alumina supply system and DUBAL wishes to become less reliant on a single source of supply; \r\n   \thas developed highly successful commercial information and management systems and a recognised expertise in the techniques of the terminal market for aluminium which has become the overriding influence on aluminium prices;\r\n   \thas an international aluminium trading system, handling some 1.5 million tonnes of metal annually in all major markets and feeding its aforementioned commercial information and management systems;\r\n   \thas widely established participation within producers\' and consumers\' systems through its tolling conversion and swapping arrangements, enabling revenues to be maximised\r\n   \tand WHEREAS DUBAL \thas established an international reputation for its products but is a non-integrated producer, lacking the aforementioned capabilities and yet obliged to compete in a rapidly changing industry with integrated, multinational organisations. .
\r\n   \tClause 1 then set out the essence of the agreement, which was to make Richco the "sole and exclusive commercial consultant" both for the sale of all Dubal\'s products throughout the world (the only exception being territories to which exports by Dubal might be prohibited by law) and for the purchase of Dubal\'s alumina requirements .
The term of the agreement was by clause 2 stated to run for initially 10 years and 4 months from 1 September 1987 to 31 December 1997 and thereafter for an evergreen period on 12 months notice by either party .
The only right by Dubal to terminate the agreement within the initial 10 year period was for breach, or in the event of Richco\'s liquidation or change of control (clause 8) .
No express right of termination was given to Richco .
There was no provision for the assessment of Richco\'s performance .
Richco\'s obligations were set out in clause 3 which in its lettered sub-paragraphs (a) to (s) provided for a range of services (among a number of prohibitions), of which the following is a sample: to advise on effective hedging procedures; to use best endeavours to promote and extend sales of Dubal\'s products by means of personal visits, correspondence and advertising; to safeguard Dubal\'s trademarks and intellectual property rights; to bring to Dubal\'s attention any useful marketing information; to act in relation to the sale, distribution and exploitation of Dubal\'s products in Dubal\'s best interests; to seek to procure orders from any person whom Dubal has advised Richco to be a potential customer; to supply reports and other information upon written request or at designated intervals; to assist upon request in the collection of debts; to explore opportunities to acquire or participate in alumina production facilities; to develop active trading in aluminium and alumina; and to help to ensure continuity of effective management of Dubal\'s commercial functions, including assistance in the training of Dubal\'s personnel .
It will be observed that such services are an amalgam of those of a management consultant, a sales agent, a marketing consultant, a financial and strategic adviser, and a management trainer .
\tThe fees to be paid to Richco for such services were set out in clause 7 and the Third Schedule .
There were three elements to such fees: \t(1) a "once-for-all establishment fee" of $2,000,000; \t(2) a fixed fee of $85,000 per month; \t(3) a fee of 2.5% of the sales value of all Dubal\'s sales .
\tUnder the subsidiary agreements, the whole of these services, and the whole of the first two fee elements and effectively 80% of the third were sub-contracted to Mr Salaam\'s Panamanian companies .
For reasons which are not clear, the sub-contracting was done to four separate companies, and in the case of the JMS and Valo contracts, there were two versions .
Although all the subsidiary agreements were dated 1 September 1987, it would appear that only the original versions of the JMS and Valo contracts were made at that time, and that all the others were made in about March 1988 .
The position is essentially as follows .
\tUnder the original versions of the JMS and Valo contracts, the period of the agreement was the same as in the Richco head contract: thus clause 2 stated that they should remain in force "for an identical term to the Primary Agreement" .
The JMS contract appears to have been the leading contract among the subsidiary agreements, for it alone contains recitals .
These state that JMS had for several months been in detailed negotiations with Dubal concerning the latter\'s desire to alter its approach towards aluminium sales, and that as a result JMS had with Dubal\'s approval invited Richco to enter into a direct relationship with Dubal, leading to both the Richco consultancy agreement (there called the "Primary Agreement") and to the ASA (there the "Supply Agreement") .
The recitals then conclude: "Richco acknowledges the value of JMS in having brought the Primary Agreement and the Supply Agreement to it and recognises the need and assistance of JMS in carrying out Richco\'s obligations under the Primary Agreement and the obligation of its affiliate Clarendon Limited under the Supply Agreement" .
\tClause 1 of the JMS contract then provides that Richco appoints JMS and "subject to the provisions of Clause 5 hereof" JMS agrees to act as "Richco\'s adviser and consultant" in the carrying out by Richco of its duties and obligations under the Richco consultancy agreement, with the exception of those services dealt with in the last four sub-paragraphs, viz (p) (q) (r) and (s), of clause 3 of that agreement .
The services dealt with in those four sub-paragraphs are the subject-matter of the Valo contract .
Clause 5, which appears in identical form in all the subsidiary agreements provides as follows: "Richco hereby acknowledges that there are no circumstances and will be no circumstances hereafter relating either directly or indirectly to the activity of or lack of performance of JMS [Valo etc] in relation to this Agreement or howsoever at the date hereof or any time during the existence of this Agreement which would entitle Richco to terminate this Agreement. .
In other words, JMS and the other companies could do nothing whatsoever to earn their fees under the subsidiary agreements (which is what happened) but would still be entitled to them, for as long as the full term of those agreements .
\tAs for those fees, the JMS and Valo contracts provided respectively as follows .
JMS was to receive (a) half of the 2.5% fee on sales provided for in the Richco consultancy agreement, and in addition (b) a fee of $5 per tonne of alumina supplied by Clarendon under the ASA plus a fee of $2 per tonne of alumina traded between Dubal and Richco and/or Clarendon in addition to the annual tonnage supplied pursuant to the ASA (the "$5s and $2s") .
The JMS contract made it clear that the $5s and the $2s were intended to be an alternative compensation to JMS for what had earlier been proposed more simply as a straightforward 80% of the 2.5% fee on sales .
Thus clause 6(vi) of the JMS contract provided that - "it is acknowledged by the parties that the original agreement to apportion the fees (hereinafter called "original apportionment") due under Clause 6(i) on the basis of 80% to JMS and 20% to Richco has been superseded through the granting of the Supply Agreement relating to Alumina and through amending the fees due on Aluminium to a 50/50 apportionment between the parties as now provided in Clause 6(i) nevertheless the parties wish to maintain the benefit of the original apportionment as above and therefore agree as follows..." and there then followed complex provisions to ensure that JMS would receive a sum equivalent to up to 80% of the 2.5% fee on sales .
[4]  Meanwhile the Valo contract provided for the payment to Valo of the $2,000,000 establishment fee and the fee of $85,000 per month .
Thus, by reason of the first versions of the JMS and Valo contracts, the whole of the fees payable under the Richco consultancy agreement, with the exception only of 20% of the 2.5% fee on sales, was to be paid to JMS or Valo throughout the life of the Richco consultancy agreement .
\tCome March 1988 these first versions of the JMS and Valo contracts were replaced by four new contracts .
For present purposes the sole relevant differences related to the periods during which and parties to whom such payments were to be made .
Thus under the second version of the JMS contract its period was restricted to the 7 or so years ending on 30 September 1994 .
The payments which would have been made to JMS under the first version after that date were now to be paid to Wid: thus the Wid contract stated that it started on 1 October 1994 and would remain in force for as long as the Richco consultancy agreement was in force .
Similarly, under the second version of the Valo contract its period was limited to the six months commencing on 1 September 1987 and ending on 29 February 1988: the payments which would have been made to Valo under the first version after the latter date were now to be paid to Nillet .
As before, however, the whole of the fees payable to Richco by Dubal, with the exception of 20% of the 2.5% fee on sales, was to be paid out to one or other of Mr Salaam\'s Panamanian companies over the life of the Richco consultancy agreement .
The explanation for these changes and multiplication of "adviser[s] and consultant[s]" was never vouchsafed .
It may be that the on-payment of the fees was split either to make the subsidiary agreements more flexible for the purpose of their use as collateral, or to disguise the destination of the fees, or both .
It may be that, as Mr Salaam said, the Wid contract was for himself alone, as a post-dated "kicker": but whether that was something agreed with his partner Mr Al Tajir, I do not know but doubt .
Since the scheme did not survive into October 1994, I cannot tell for sure .
\tSince the subsidiary agreements make reference to the ASA, and indeed the payment of the $5s and $2s depends on the ASA, I should say something further about that agreement here .
It was also dated 1 September 1987 and was given the same term as the Richco consultancy agreement .
It operated on a calendar year basis, commencing with 1988 .
For each year Clarendon agreed to sell, and Dubal agreed to buy a base quantity of 260,000 tonnes of alumina, with options to increase or decrease .
For the purpose of the $5s, that base quantity would alone generate a fee income under the subsidiary agreements of $1,300,000 .
The price was determinable by a formula dependent on the London Metal Exchange ("LME") market price for aluminium (ie the product, not the raw material) averaged out over each month, on the deemed basis that the annual supply would be delivered in twelve equal instalments over the twelve months of the year .
There was a put and call option arrangement to determine aluminium prices in the years after 1988 .
Although the ASA contained full terms for the physical delivery of alumina, the contract contemplated that in at any rate 1988 and 1989 Dubal would be primarily supplied by its pre-existing supplier, Alcoa, and the ASA would for those years operate only as a contract for differences, in the sense that if the price payable by Dubal to Alcoa were lower than the ASA formula price, then Dubal would pay the difference to Clarendon, and vice versa .
In effect, therefore, the ASA guaranteed to Dubal a source of supply for 10 years at a price, related to the market price of aluminium in 1988, and thereafter determined by put and call options .
\tAs matters turned out, Dubal did well out of the ASA for two years, until the pricing formula was changed by an amendment in September 1989 .
After that, Dubal did badly .
\tA consideration of the terms of the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements standing by themselves raise obvious questions as to the commercial sense and indeed propriety of what is going on .
If, as the recitals to the Richco consultancy agreement suggest, Richco is such a powerful and useful partner in a commercial alliance, why is there any need for Richco itself to sub-contract its services to four Panamanian companies, creatures of Mr Salaam, at the cost of practically the whole of the earnings to be derived under it .
Why should Dubal want to rely on the Panamanian companies\' advice and assistance rather than on Richco\'s .
And even if Dubal did want advice and assistance from the Panamanian companies, why not contract directly with them .
What evidence is there that Richco performed any services under the Richco consultancy agreement .
What evidence is there that JMS, Valo and/or Nillet performed any services .
Why should clause 5 of the subsidiary agreements state that the Panamanian companies should be entitled to their fees even if they had done nothing to earn them .
Why is there no right in Dubal to terminate its obligations on giving suitable notice within the ten year period .
Dubai, the Dubal smelter, and Gulf Resources Corporation \tI now have to set the Richco consultancy agreement in its historical context .
\tDubai is one of the Gulf emirates, part of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) .
In the eighteenth century it was a fishing village .
The dynasty of the al-Maktoum family in Dubai was established by Maktoum bin Buti, who ruled there until his death in 1852 .
HH Sheikh Rashid bin Sa\'id al-Maktoum ("Sheikh Rashid)" came to power in 1958 .
As Ruler he traditionally enjoyed absolute discretion in financial affairs, tempered only by tradition and not by institutional limitations .
He could dispense funds and gifts to members of the royal family and other notables, as dictated by tradition and as he deemed fit .
With the discovery of oil in Dubai, pressures towards urbanisation and modernisation increased, but the Ruler continued to retain absolute powers particularly over financial affairs .
Even today, the distinction between public and private monies is ambiguous .
Sheikh Rashid is credited during his reign, until the stroke which totally incapacitated him in 1981, with steering his emirate with wisdom and foresight towards its modern prosperity as one of the trading entrepots of the region .
It was only in 1969 that Dubai produced its first oil, from which time it has developed fast from its trading origins into the modern economic state it is today .
In 1971 Dubai became one of the seven founding emirates of the UAE, a federation with a central constitution, but within each individual emirate power remained in the hands of the Ruler and his family .
In the words of one writer, \t"The government of Dubai has been described as a vast holding company in which the Ruler acts as chairman, governing board and chief executive"..."[The] Ruler stands at the apex of decision making process. .
[5] \tSheikh Rashid died in October 1990, and was succeeded by his eldest son, HH Sheikh Maktoum Bin Rashid Al Maktoum ("Sheikh Maktoum", the present Ruler of Dubai) .
His second son, and the present deputy Ruler, is Sheikh Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum ("Sheikh Hamdan") .
He has been chairman of Dubal since its incorporation in 1975 .
Sheikh Rashid\'s third son, Sheikh Mohamed bin Rashid Al Maktoum ("Sheikh Mohamed") is the current Crown Prince of Dubai, and since at least 1981 has been in charge of Dubai\'s oil industry and revenues .
\tDuring Sheikh Rashid\'s reign, until incapacity overtook him in 1981, his most powerful representative and confidant, outside the immediate royal family, was Mr Al Tajir .
It is said that such a representative answers only to the Ruler, and his fortunes rise and fall with those of the Ruler: his authority becomes, for all practical purposes, equal to that of the Ruler himself .
As such, he is likely, with the express or even tacit approval of the Ruler, to accumulate great wealth by means of commissions not only from foreign businesses which he is asked to sponsor within Dubai (all foreign businesses need a sponsor in Dubai), but even from the domestic affairs over which as royal representative he has responsibility within Dubai .
\tIn 1963 Mr Al Tajir became Director of HH the Ruler\'s Affairs and Petroleum Affairs and effectively the most powerful man in Dubai after the Ruler himself .
There is an issue as to whether he ceased to hold that position in 1981 when Sheikh Rashid was incapacitated .
I shall refer to that issue in greater detail below .
For the moment I will simply record my finding that, in accordance with the evidence of Mr Al Tajir himself and of Sheikh Hamdam, albeit neither of those could be cross-examined on their statements, Mr Al Tajir did lose or resign his position in 1981 with the downfall of Sheikh Rashid\'s health and thus the waning of his personal power .
Mr Al Tajir thenceforth gave up his office in the offices of the Ruler\'s Department and operated from his home .
He remained, however, UAE Ambassador to the Court of St James, an Emirates post, until 1987 .
There is nevertheless no dispute that at least up to 1981 Mr Al Tajir spoke for the Ruler, and played an active role, in connection with the affairs of the project for the construction of an aluminium smelter in Dubai and ultimately of Dubal itself .
\tDubal was created by decree on 5 May 1975 .
The decision to build an aluminium smelter in Dubai owed much of course to the presence in the Gulf and in particular in Dubai of plentiful supplies of cheap energy, which is essential for such a plant, but was also due to Sheikh Rashid\'s vision of industrialising Dubai and to the support of Mr Al Tajir for the enterprise .
Mr Salaam, who had been involved in the development of aluminium and chemical plants in the Gulf, was himself an early exponent of the idea of an aluminium smelter for Dubai .
Sheikh Rashid started out as owner initially of 80% of Dubal\'s shares, but before long acquired the remaining 20% .
The development of the smelter was financed entirely by him .
Dubal was therefore owned and financed by the Ruler, and his second son, Sheikh Hamdan was installed as chairman .
\tIn February 1978 Mr Livingstone, who was by profession a chartered accountant but had long worked in industry, commenced work as managing director of Dubal .
Mr Al Tajir was instrumental in that appointment, although Mr Livingstone\'s recommendation came from Dubal\'s then deputy chairman, Mr Paul Brauner, who was also chairman of British Smelter Constructions Ltd ("BSCL") .
That company was the constructor of the smelter, and had previously built the Alba (Aluminium Bahrain) smelter in Bahrain .
Mr Livingstone had been first finance manager and then general manager at Alba since February 1971, and had guided it through the final stages of construction into start-up and then established production .
In 1975 he had been awarded the CBE, with the approval of the government of Bahrain, for services to British commercial interests on account of the success of the Alba project .
In October 1979 Mr Livingstone succeeded Mr Brauner as deputy chairman and a director of Dubal and also became its chief executive .
At the same time he was granted two powers of attorney, in identical terms save that one was governed by Dubai law and the other by English law .
By clause 1 of each Mr Livingstone was empowered - "To transact, manage, carry on and do all and every business matter deemed requisite and necessary or in any manner connected with or having reference to the business and affairs of the company in relation to the financing of the company\'s business, the placing of contracts and all other relevant matters of whatsoever nature pertaining to the whole of the company\'s undertaking and business including without limiting the generality thereof its smelter and related products in Dubai and elsewhere" and by clause 9 he was authorised - "To execute sign enter into acknowledge perfect and do all such deals agreements instruments acts and things which will be requisite for or in relation to all or any of the purposes or matters aforesaid. .
\tIt is common ground that by reason of his appointment as chief executive, director and attorney of Dubal, there was a fiduciary relationship between Mr Livingstone and Dubal and a fiduciary duty owed by the former to protect the latter and its assets .
Mr Salaam and the GRC Management Agreement \tOn 29 October 1979, on the same day that Mr Livingstone entered upon his new appointments and received his powers of attorney, the board of Dubal approved and Mr Livingstone signed on behalf of Dubal a management contract with one of Mr Salaam\'s Panamanian companies known as Gulf Resources Corporation ("GRC") .
The GRC management agreement gave to GRC for twenty years and thereafter on one year\'s notice responsibility inter alia for the purchase of all Dubal\'s raw materials, the sale of all its products, the acquisition of all its spares, plant and equipment, the recruitment of all its employees, the provision of advice in the management and investment of all its funds, the provision of general management skills and advice, the development of a range of financial and commercial services and the exploitation of its technological know-how .
In return GRC was to be reimbursed all its actual costs and in addition earn fees equal to 2% of Dubal\'s purchases of raw materials, 3.5% of its sales (reducing in stages to 2.5%  [6]  from 1982 onwards), 5% of purchases of spares, supplies and services, 15% of the first year\'s gross annual salary of anyone recruited, and on top of everything else 0.8% of the annual sales turnover of Dubal .
GRC had the option of terminating this agreement at the end of every five years of the initial twenty, but Dubal could not terminate within that initial period .
Since GRC\'s fees were on top of the reimbursement of its actual costs, it was a very profitable contract .
\tMr Salaam was born in Beirut in 1937 into a Lebanese family prominent both in politics and in business .
Over the last half century or so his family has provided three prime ministers of Lebanon and one of Jordan, has founded Middle East Airlines, and has played an important role in the business development of the Gulf states .
Mr Salaam\'s own career has straddled business and politics .
He was asked on several occasions to form a cabinet in Lebanon, but had to decline .
In 1986 and 1987 he acted as an envoy of the President of Lebanon in diplomatic efforts to end the Lebanese civil war .
He is on personal terms with members of the ruling families of many Arab states .
He is an engineer by training .
His first business venture was a construction company in Kuwait .
In the 1960s he allied himself with the new opportunities which the Gulf\'s oil wealth created, and which led to large-scale construction projects .
He was invited by the Bahraini minister of development who was also chairman of Alba to assist with the development of that project .
It was in that context that he first came into contact, albeit briefly, with Mr Livingstone .
\tMr Salaam has known Mr Al Tajir for some thirty years .
He was first introduced to him in Lebanon at a time when Mr Al Tajir was already the Director of the Ruler of Dubai\'s Affairs .
The two began a business association which has had its ups and downs but which certainly continued into the time with which these proceedings are concerned .
They began by purchasing the American Life Building in Beirut on a 50/50 basis .
The building is still the headquarters of Mr Salaam\'s corporate affairs .
They also became partners in the purchase of the Fidelity Bank building in Philadelphia .
Mr Salaam  always regarded Mr Al Tajir as speaking with the authority of the Ruler of Dubai, and claimed to continue so to regard him even beyond the Ruler\'s stroke in 1981 and down to his death in 1990 .
\tIn about 1971 Mr Salaam was touring the Gulf states with the chairman of Kaiser Aluminium, seeking to promote a "Grand Smelter Scheme", for the repetition of the Alba project in other nations such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Abu Dhabi and Dubai .
He met Sheikh Rashid and Mr Al Tajir in Dubai in connection with these ideas .
There was talk of letters of intent, which however came to nothing .
Instead, Dubai turned to BSCL (a company within the Wimpey group) for the construction of the Dubal smelter .
Then in 1979 Mr Al Tajir personally invited Mr Salaam to lend his aid to  Dubal .
The outcome of that invitation was the GRC management agreement .
\tThe evidence before me concerning that agreement was not so much in conflict, as conducted at wholly separate levels .
Dubal\'s  thesis in this connection was that the GRC management agreement was an attempt, a very successful attempt, to fleece Dubal, orchestrated by Mr Salaam, Mr Al Tajir and Mr Livingstone: in other words a prototype of the Richco consultancy agreement scheme .
Mr Salaam\'s thesis, on the other hand was that in 1979 the Dubal project was in danger of collapse, with the potential loss of the vast funds which had been invested in it: that he and his organisation (GRC was specifically created for the purpose) were brought in to conduct a rescue operation, and had succeeded in completing the project and establishing Dubal as a world-class smelter; and that GRC had then been rewarded by being forced out of its contract .
To determine the full rights and wrongs of those competing theses is certainly beyond the scope of these proceedings .
Indeed, Dubal\'s opening submissions introduced the GRC management agreement for the purpose of a much narrower and more focused submission .
Thus, to quote its opening skeleton: "There is no issue in this action as to the merits or otherwise of the GRC management agreement .
Its significance to the issues in this action lies...in the dealings between Mr Salaam, Mr Amhurst and Mr Livingstone in relation to GRC; and...in the circumstances in which it came to an end..." \tWhat then were those dealings and circumstances .
First, Mr Livingstone was a director of GRC .
It might seem surprising that that was so, since Mr Livingstone was the chief executive of the employer of GRC under the management agreement, and there was obvious potential for conflict of interest .
Later, in March 1982, Mr Amhurst became a director and secretary of GRC .
It is plain that Mr Salaam benefitted from the employment of his company as Dubal\'s manager, and so did Mr Livingstone .
In its action against Mr Livingstone, one of the matters Dubal complained of was his illicit receipt of sums under the GRC agreement .
Moreover, in cross-examination both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone said that Mr Al Tajir also benefitted from the GRC agreement .
Mr Livingstone\'s cross-examination by Mr Seymour on behalf of Dubal contained this passage (on day 10 at 88/91): \t"Q.\tGRC was thus extremely well remunerated under this agreement, was it not .
\tA.\tIt was fully remunerated, certainly .
\tQ.\tIf we wonder why GRC was so handsomely remunerated under this agreement, we perhaps need only remind ourselves of the evidence of Mr Salaam yesterday that Mr Tajir received half of all this money; do you agree with that .
\tA.\tHalf .
I am trying to remember whether it was half .
\tQ.\tMr Salaam\'s evidence, your recollection may be that Mr Tajir\'s percentage was different .
\tA.\tWhy I was hesitating is I am not sure whether Mr Tajir got half of what came from the company, but I do believe he had half of the shares, yes .
\tQ.\tIt is not very difficult to see what the half would have been .
It would have been half of all the fees received, no account having to be taken of any expenses because they were covered separately; that is right, is it not .
\tA.\tYes, more or less .
\tQ.\tWhat did you get .
\tA.\tVery little .
\tQ.\tTell his Lordship how little .
\tA.\tIt was supposed to be, after the thing was done I was informed that I would get 10 per cent of what Mr Tajir got .
\tQ.\tWho else was in for a share .
\tA.\tMr Tajir of course, Mr Salaam\'s companies, and that was it, as far as I know.... \tQ.\tYou see, what we have got here at the outset of your involvement with the Dubai Aluminium Company, I suggest, is an agreement being put in place, the object of which, at least from your personal points of view, and by you I mean you personally, Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam, was to steal money from Dubal .
\tA.\tThat was certainly not the only objective of the agreement, it would be wrong .
\tQ.\tI am not suggesting that nothing was [done], that no  services were provided under this agreement...But certainly a feature of this agreement was that it was a means of abstracting cash from Dubal .
\tA.\tInter alia, yes... \tQ.\tWhose idea was it .
\tA.\tWell, we were not short, in Dubai, of people with ideas of this kind and I am, unfortunately, in the role that I have, if I was to stay there and build the company, which is what I wanted to do, you had to accommodate these to some degree .
That was the environment in which we were and there is as much point in complaining about it as there is complaining about the weather .
You have to deal with it, I am afraid .
\tQ.\tSo you are telling his Lordship that it was Mr Al Tajir\'s idea .
\tA.\tWell, Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam put it to me and I went along with it. .
\tAs for the circumstances in which the GRC agreement came to an end, they were as follows .
Sheikh Rashid suffered his incapacitating stroke in around August/September 1981 .
By 2 February, the Government of Dubai, in the name of the Ruler but effectively in the form of a committee chaired by Sheikh Mohamed and also containing on it Mr Ahmed Al Tayer, the finance minister of the UAE and a confidant of Sheikh Hamdan, but significantly not Mr Al Tajir, had commissioned a report on Dubal from the accountants, Messrs Price Waterhouse .
Their report is dated 25 February 1982 .
Among its main findings are the following: \t"1.02  DUBAL\'s plant is impressive .
The smelter is already producing high quality aluminium at more than its rated capacity of 135,000 tonnes per annum...However the cost of Dh5,654 million is substantially higher than originally envisaged and this has resulted in DUBAL having heavy loan commitments and interest charges...Consequently after interest and depreciation, DUBAL is reporting large losses and continues to require additional finance from the Government... \t"1.11  DUBAL entered into a management agreement with Gulf Resources Corporation on 2 October 1979 which commits DUBAL to substantial payments in respect of commissions on sales and purchases and reimbursement of expenses charged by GRC .
The total amounts charged to DUBAL for 1980 and 1981 amounted to Dh 16 million and Dh 48 million .
\t"1.12  We have been unable to ascertain the shareholdings interest in GRC but from what we have so far ascertained it does not appear that either DUBAL or the Government owns the shares .
\t"1.13  DUBAL\'s director and chief executive, Mr Livingstone, is also a director of GRC and certain affiliated companies and informed us that these appointments were accepted at the request of the Government of Dubai .
We believe there is a conflict of interest in these arrangements which is unsatisfactory... \t"1.15  We believe that the amounts paid to GRC are out of proportion to the commercial benefit received by DUBAL and that the service provided by GRC could be wholly or largely carried out by management employed directly by DUBAL or a subsidiary company... Price Waterhouse therefore recommended that the GRC agreement should be brought to an end, if possible .
\tAs a result of this recommendation, Mr Livingstone began to report to Mr Al Tayer in Dubai and to Mr Amhurst in London in connection with the renegotiation of the GRC agreement .
There was discussion about reducing the term of the agreement from 20 years to 10 years, and capping the fees; but the negotiations dragged on in a desultory way .
In December 1982 Sheikh Hamdan gave instructions for the termination of the agreement .
On 11 March 1983 a meeting took place in Dubai between Sheikh Mohamed and Mr Salaam and his brother .
Manuscript notes (in English) of this meeting survive and were disclosed by Mr Amhurst in these proceedings .
Item 12 in this document reads as follows: "New era in Dubai .
MRM [Sheikh Mohamed] describing that MMT\'s [Mr Al Tajir\'s] ways of business are over. .
Mr Salaam was asked about this meeting .
He accepted that it had taken place, but denied that the notes of it were his .
He said he was unable to say whether they were in his brother\'s handwriting .
He accepted that his brother was at the meeting, and was a prot\xc3\xa9g\xc3\xa9 of Sheikh Mohamed; also that his brother and Mr Amhurst were in contact with one another .
I therefore infer that the notes are those of Mr Saad Salaam .
Mr Salaam said that if the notes were his brother\'s, then they were not trustworthy .
However, in an affidavit which Mr Salaam made for the purpose of these proceedings (his third affirmation, at para 83) Mr Salaam had said this: "I recall that at one stage I was sufficiently frustrated by what was going on and the confused messages which were coming through to GRC that I intervened directly with HH Sheikh Mohamed...What I do clearly recall is that in my audience with HH Sheikh Mohamed while there was, predictably given the political rivalries endemic to Dubai life, a certain amount of invective about HE Mahdi Tajir and the money HH Sheikh Mohamed (no doubt, correctly) believed that he was earning in connection with his stewardship of Dubal and about Mr Livingstone, HH Sheikh Mohamed was not critical of me or GRC..." \tMr Salaam was asked about that passage in his affirmation (at day 8, page 20):  \t"Q.\tWould you like to tell his Lordship about the certain amount of invective about Mr Al Tajir at your meeting  with Sheikh Mohamed that you refer to in this paragraph .
\t A.\tNothing to do with any criticism of Mr Al Tajir .
He just asked about whether we know anything about Gulf Resources trading in oil and I said, "No, Sheikh  Mohamed, Gulf Resources did not trade in oil. .
He said, "Would you know why Mahdi Tajir might have used Gulf Resources? .
I said, "I have no idea Sheikh Mohamed. .
That is the only bit about the invective you were referring to .
Nothing to do with any criticism .
It was a query .
\t Q.\tI do not mean this in any offensive way, Mr Salaam, but could you explain to his Lordship your understanding of the English word "invective" .
\t A.\tI thought inquisitive, that is really, and if I have used the wrong word I am sorry .
\t Q.\tSo a certain amount of invective about Mr Al Tajir should be read as Sheikh Mohamed asked some questions about him, should it .
\t A.\tJust one question on oil. .
\tIn my judgment, this was unsatisfactory evidence on a point which Dubal had flagged in its opening skeleton as of particular significance .
Thus it was there submitted that as a result of the conversation on 11 March 1983 Mr Salaam knew that Mr Al Tajir was not in a position to give authorisation on the part of Dubal or  the government of Dubai to any transactions, and in particular not in a position to authorise the payment of any "commission" to  any one .
I accept that submission: indeed, that was Mr Al Tajir\'s own evidence, as I have already mentioned .
\tIt was, however, almost another year, 1 March 1984, before Dubal and GRC entered into a new agreement to give effect to the proposed termination of the management agreement .
Under the March 1984 agreement GRC\'s management duties and fees were limited, pending final termination on 1 September 1989 .
After the March 1984 agreement GRC began to negotiate the capitalised buy-out of its remaining rights: and finally a complete quietus was given to the Dubal/GRC relationship under a termination agreement dated 29 September 1984 which recorded the past payment of some $22 million by Dubal to GRC under the March 1984 agreement and the promise of further payment of $24.5 million to GRC in instalments over the period up to January 1986 .
Thus it cost Dubal over $46 million to rid itself of GRC .
\tI do not have to go into the merits or otherwise of the work performed by GRC under its contract with Dubal .
Mr Salaam\'s evidence was to the effect that his help saved the whole project from disaster .
He remains bitter to this day that GRC was forced from its position by what he regarded as the wrongful unilateral termination of the GRC management agreement, for which the compensation GRC received made but small amends .
He ascribed the process by which GRC was forced from its position as "Dubaisation": he said that nominally the process was put in terms of a direct request by Sheikh Hamdan, but that he "always presumed at the time that Mahdi Tajir was also behind "Dubaisation"" .
\tIn my judgment, however, the critical fact behind the rise and fall of GRC was that in 1979 when the management agreement was made, Mr Al Tajir was in the ascendant, whereas after 1981, when Sheikh Rashid suffered an incapacitating stroke, he had lost his power base in Dubai as the representative of the Ruler and the Director of his Affairs .
Since Mr Salaam justifies the Richco scheme on the authority or presumed authority of Mr Al Tajir, it is necessary to go into this matter in greater detail, and this is a suitable moment to do so .
\tSheikh Rashid remained the Ruler of Dubai until his death in 1990: but from the time of his incapacitating stroke in 1981, his effective rule was over .
The court received a clear insight into the destructiveness of Sheikh Rashid\'s illness and the effect it had on the reins of power from the evidence Mr Jack Briggs .
Mr Briggs had served throughout his working life in various police forces in the middle east, and in 1965 became the Commandant of Police in Dubai, at Sheikh Rashid\'s personal request .
He saw Sheikh Rashid every day, as part of his employment .
He became a trusted friend .
His admiration and affection for the Ruler were clear from his evidence .
Sheikh Rashid\'s first stroke occurred in 1979 .
It did not render him incapable of performing his duties as Ruler, but his health began to deteriorate and he began to shift the responsibilities of government to his sons .
From the time of his second stroke in 1981, however, Sheikh Rashid was confined to a wheelchair, he was blind and incapable of any but a few words .
Mr Briggs continued to visit him regularly, faithfully .
Mr Briggs would be present when Mr Al Tajir would also visit .
Of necessity, of course, no business was, or could be, discussed .
\tMr Briggs was well placed to observe and understand the transfer of power which followed on the Ruler\'s illness .
Mr Briggs\' evidence was that as the Ruler began to involve his sons in the affairs of government following his initial stroke, so the power of Mr Al Tajir began to wain .
In his view it had ceased altogether by the time of the Ruler\'s second devastating stroke .
Mr Briggs exemplified that process by reference to a letter which he was asked by Sheikh Mohamed to approve .
He was somewhat uncertain as to the date of this letter, putting it variously at November 1980, or in 1981 or early 1982, and the letter has not itself surfaced into evidence, but what Mr Briggs said about it was as follows .
It was a letter written by Sheikh Mohamed to the Dubai oil company, emphasising that Mr Al Tajir no longer had any responsibility or authority for oil affairs, and that he, Sheikh Mohamed, was now in charge of such affairs .
Mr Briggs also said that Mr Al Tajir\'s office at the Ruler\'s court was vacated shortly afterwards and he ceased thereafter to carry out any duties or functions on behalf of the government of Dubai .
I find Mr Briggs\' evidence about the vacation of Mr Al Tajir\'s office to be particularly significant .
The official title of that office was the Office of HH the Ruler\'s Affairs and Petroleum Affairs .
It makes sense that if Mr Al Tajir lost control of Petroleum Affairs to Sheikh Mohamed, and lost his role as representative of the Ruler, due to the Ruler\'s ill-health, then he would lose both his position and his physical station in the Ruler\'s Office at the Ruler\'s court .
Mr Briggs\' recollection was that the office was taken over by the Director of Customs and Ports in 1981 .
It was put to Mr Briggs on behalf of Mr Livingstone (day 2, page 75) that  "when Sheikh Mohamed took over responsibility for Dubai Petroleum, Mahdi Tajir stopped going to his office every day but still retained his office there, he still retained his desk there and the staff continued to work for him? .
To which Mr Briggs replied "I have no recollection of that whatsoever" .
Mr Briggs also made it clear that following Mr Al Tajir\'s exit from an official role in government in Dubai, everyone knew of the change in his status .
He said that by 1982 it was well known by everyone in the business community in Dubai or those involved with its government or businesses controlled by it that Mr Al Tajir had ceased to act on behalf of the government .
This was despite the fact that no official announcement was ever made .
It was his view that it would have been totally untrue as well as out of character for Mr Al Tajir to have claimed to act on behalf of the government of Dubai after 1981 .
It was well known that acting rulership had passed out of the hands of Sheikh Rashid into those of his eldest son (and the present Ruler) Sheikh Maktoum .
As Mr Briggs said (day 10, page 83) in the context of Sheikh Mohamed\'s letter: "this sort of thing in the place like Dubai goes round .
I mean everybody knows what\'s happening .
It was common knowledge. .
\tIn my judgment Mr Briggs was an excellent witness, an independent witness, and I have no hesitation in accepting his evidence as to such matters .
It accords with common sense, in that it is to be expected that Mr Al Tajir, whose personal power was linked to that of Sheikh Rashid, would lose his unique position with the effective end of his patron\'s rule .
It is Mr Al Tajir\'s own evidence that this is what happened, that he had resigned from his position in 1982, and even though Mr Al Tajir was not cross-examined on his witness statement, on such a matter his evidence can hardly fail to carry particular weight .
It is in any event corroborated by Mr Briggs .
It is also confirmed by the witness statement of Sheikh Hamdan, admitted under the Civil Evidence Act: he also states that Mr Al Tajir resigned and that control of the Ruler\'s Office was taken over by Sheikh Mohamed in 1981 .
It is moreover consistent with what happened in connection with the GRC management agreement .
To my mind it is no coincidence that by February 1982 an investigation into the GRC contract is being spearheaded by Sheikh Mohamed (even though the chairman of Dubal was Sheikh Hamdan), and that Mr Tayer seems to have taken over from Mr Al Tajir as the government minister most concerned .
As Mr Livingstone said, albeit in another context, there was a "changing of the guard" .
\tIn these circumstances, the fact that the federal UAE telephone company continued to list Mr Al Tajir up to 1995 as still holding his previous position must, as Sheikh Hamdan has stated, be viewed as an uncorrected error .
Similarly Mr Al Tajir\'s own entry in "Who\'s Who" continued to list him as Director of the Ruler\'s Affairs down into the 1990s: but I cannot regard that as significant in the light of Mr Al Tajir\'s own evidence, quite apart from the other evidence which I have taken into account .
\tOnly Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone say that Mr Al Tajir remained in power and in office as Sheikh Rashid\'s representative, at any rate in matters relating to Dubal, and able to authorise the Richco scheme: that is evidence which, for the reasons given above, I cannot accept .
Its rejection undermines an essential strand in Mr Salaam\'s defence in these proceedings .
That is something to which I will revert below .
\tMr Livingstone\'s evidence that he was a beneficiary of the GRC management agreement rings true, quite apart from the fact that it gains credibility as evidence against his own interest .
I regard his evidence that Mr Al Tajir was also a beneficiary, and a major beneficiary, of the GRC contract with more circumspection: Mr Al Tajir\'s statement does not deal with the GRC contract at all, and his entry into hospital robbed him of the opportunity of dealing with this aspect .
However, cross-examination of Mr Livingstone on behalf of Mr Al Tajir did not challenge that part of his evidence, even though it was designed in general to show up Mr Livingstone in a poor light .
Moreover, Mr Salaam\'s evidence was that in general Mr Al Tajir and he were fifty/fifty partners in their business ventures; as for GRC, he said that Mr Al Tajir had sponsored it in Dubai (every foreign business needed its Dubai sponsor), but more than that, "he was our partner" (day 7, page 101) .
That would be consistent with what I would infer to be Sheikh Mohamed\'s criticism of Mr Al Tajir at the meeting with the Salaam brothers in March 1983 .
I would therefore accept Mr Livingstone\'s (and Mr Salaam\'s) evidence regarding Mr Al Tajir\'s interest in the GRC contract via a 50% shareholding, in GRC .
Whether that interest was known to or authorised by Sheikh Rashid is beyond the scope of these proceedings .
\tThe importance of the GRC management contract is therefore this: it shows Mr Salaam, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir associated in an earlier venture under which the proceeds of a highly profitable management contract with Dubal passed into their hands; and it shows that that contract was brought to an end after the ill-health of Sheikh Rashid had led to the resignation of Mr Al Tajir from his previous role in government as the representative of the Ruler and the Director of the Ruler\'s Office; and it shows that Sheikh Mohamed, who had effectively succeeded to Mr Al Tajir\'s position, had told Mr Salaam that Mr Al Tajir\'s "ways of business are over" .
These are not propitious circumstances in which to find that the Richco scheme was authorised by Mr Al Tajir as representative of the government or Ruler of Dubai .
The origins of the Richco consultancy agreement \tIt seems to me that a proper evaluation of the Richco consultancy agreement and its subsidiary agreements must begin with their origins .
It is necessary to record the evidence of the major protagonists, to the extent that it was available .
Mr Salaam\'s evidence \tMr Salaam traced the origins of the scheme to Mr Al Tajir himself .
He said that since GRC left Dubai in 1984, despite shared business interests, he only renewed close personal contact with Mr Al Tajir in 1986 when they were both deeply involved as diplomatic go-betweens in the Lebanese peace process .
At that time Mr Al Tajir spoke to him about Dubal, apparently with the authority of the Dubai government: Mr Salaam asserted that Mr Al Tajir was still Director of the Ruler\'s Office and of Petroleum Affairs .
He recognised that his influence and presence in government affairs had waned, but that this "did not apply to Dubal...where Mahdi Tajir\'s authority on behalf of the Dubai Government was unquestioned" .
Mr Al Tajir told him of his concerns for Dubal: lack of vertical integration, lack of control over its alumina supplies, the need for a fourth potline to increase production and lower costs, the lack of necessary capital, the uncertainty of long term gas supplies for the smelter\'s energy needs, ultimately Dubal\'s long term viability .
Mr Al Tajir ended by asking him to investigate two things: alternative and additional gas supplies, and the feasibility of opening and running a sales agency operation in the United States .
\tMr Salaam said that he set to work on both those requests .
He asked his employees at GRC, a Mr Mike Thomas and a Mr Ray Christopherson, to investigate the possibility of alternative gas supplies for Dubal .
Nothing ultimately came of this .
As for a proposed United States sales agency, this was delegated to his right hand man and chief accountant in his organisation, Mr Alex Ayoub (who unfortunately died in 1991), as well as to his solicitor, Mr Amhurst, in liaison with Mr Livingstone .
A Swiss tax structure was developed, and two Panamanian companies were acquired for the venture, Valo and JMS (the latter under its previous name, Giffens Trading and Finance Co SA) .
Mr Amhurst developed over various drafts a sales agency contract (the "Valo sales agreement"), providing for a commission of 2.5%, a mobilisation fee of $1.5 million, and a monthly payment of $100,000 towards office overheads .
This was negotiated with Mr Livingstone and vetted by Dubal\'s own solicitors, Messrs Allen & Overy .
In the end, this project also came to nothing, although Mr Salaam was rather vague about why this was - "I think this may have been because of Alex Ayoub\'s doubts about its viability" .
\tIt was at about this time, said Mr Salaam, that Mr Al Tajir raised with him the subject of the Marc Rich organisation .
He asked him to look into whether Richco might potentially be a suitable commercial ally for Dubal .
Mr Al Tajir knew Marc Rich personally, they were neighbours in St Moritz, but he needed Mr Salaam to appraise the commercial and technical ramifications of such an alliance .
He wanted Mr Salaam to act as a "catalyst", working with Mr Livingstone .
Nothing specific was said at that time about remuneration, save that Mr Al Tajir instructed him that their rewards were to come out of the payment (or "pot") which he, Mr Salaam, was to negotiate with Mr Rich .
He assumed that there would be a fifty/fifty split between Mr Al Tajir and himself .
Mr Al Tajir set up a meeting with Mr Rich, to be attended by Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone .
(That meeting or series of meetings took place on what can be established to be 26 or 27 May 1987) .
He regarded Mr Livingstone as Mr Al Tajir\'s and the government\'s representative .
He looked on the detail of the Richco/Dubal side of the arrangement to be a matter for Mr Livingstone to discuss with Richco, while his "essential role" was to persuade Mr Rich himself into an alliance and, if that succeeded, to negotiate with him the terms on which he (Mr Salaam) and Mr Al Tajir were to receive commission for introducing Dubal and Richco to one another .
That was discussed in a private meeting between him and Mr Rich, his only meeting with Mr Rich .
They negotiated a split of the 2.5% fee on Dubal\'s sales of 20% for Richco and 80% for Mr Al Tajir and himself .
He ascribed the proportions of that split to Mr Rich\'s interest in the alliance and optimism in bigger and better things .
He said of the 80%: "This payment was essentially in the nature of a fee for being instrumental in effecting the introduction of Dubal to Richco .
I should have preferred it if the fee had been paid on a one-off basis or by a few instalments .
However, Marc Rich was not prepared to agree that...He wanted [GRC] to be tied-in .
At that stage he was not altogether comfortable with the idea of having to deal with Dubal (who he did not know well) alone .
He regarded the Gulf in general as my part of the world .
He knew that I knew Dubai and Dubal well .
In effect, he wanted us in as a safeguard. .
\tHe also negotiated the mobilisation fee of $2m and the monthly fees of $85,000 with Mr Rich, but these were not, he said, intended to be split with Mr Al Tajir or even discussed with him .
They reflected the fees already negotiated with Dubal in the context of the Valo sales agreement: the $2m was an upfront mobilisation fee, without which he was not prepared to commit GRC\'s resources, a "show of goodwill and seriousness", and the $85,000 monthly fee was an estimate of the likely costs of an office in Dubai (if one should be needed) .
[7]  It was hoped that the alliance would lead to further engineering projects in due course, eg in connection with alternative gas supplies or the proposed fourth potline; there was also the expectation of providing Richco with stand-by consultancy services .
It was only as things turned out that, once Mr Rich was comfortable with his relationship with Dubal, he, together with Mr Al Tajir and Mr Livingstone, effectively excluded Mr Salaam from further involvement .
However, the Richco consultancy agreement  "was a bona fide agreement, of real and perceived potential benefit to Dubal (as well as Richco); and...Richco agreed to pay my companies, by way of the subsidiary agreements, by way of the reward for the introduction effected as well as to secure our involvement in the operation of the Richco Consultancy Agreement if required..." \tMr Salaam was vague about the reason for the use of four separate companies as signatories to the subsidiary agreements, or for the replacement of the original Valo and JMS agreements by their later versions - he ascribed such details as being the domain of Mr Ayoub and Mr Amhurst .
He said, however, that the term of the original version of the JMS agreement was an error, for he was certain that his original agreement with Mr Al Tajir was that the fee to be split between them was only to be for seven years, and that the last three years (ultimately covered by the Wid agreement) was to be for Mr Salaam alone: his expression was that the Wid agreement was to "kick in" .
\tThere came a stage, said Mr Salaam, when Mr Al Tajir gave him specific instructions as to the division of the commission arrangements .
It was around the time when the original documentation was signed, viz 1 September 1987, but he could not remember where their meeting took place, other than that it was face to face .
He said that Mr Al Tajir\'s instructions were that he should get 40%, Mr Salaam should get 30% and Mr Livingstone should get 30% .
He did not regard Mr Livingstone\'s windfall as unusual: senior executives in the Gulf or Arab world would often be compensated in such form, in the absence of share options or the other elements of a remuneration package which might have been available in the West .
However, Mr Salaam was not happy: he had thought that he would share the commission equally with Mr Al Tajir .
Worse was to come, for his brother Saad found out about the commission arrangements and demanded a share, on the basis ("quite wrongly", said Mr Salaam) that the Richco scheme was a continuation of the GRC management agreement, in which it had been agreed that Saad Salaam would receive a share for running the Dubai office .
Saad Salaam intervened directly with Mr Al Tajir at around the turn of 1987/88, the upshot of which was that Mr Al Tajir directed that Saad was to receive 15% of the available commission .
This was effected through Mr Livingstone and with the aid of Mr Amhurst: on 28 February 1988 Mr Amhurst instructed Richco on behalf of JMS (and Valo) that 15% of the amount payable to those subsidiaries should be paid to a separate account at Banque Gutzwiller, Geneva .
[8]  That was Saad\'s account .
Mr Salaam represented this as a fait accompli with which he had nothing to do .
The upshot was that Saad received 15% of what was available, and the original three participants divided the remaining 85% in accordance with Mr Al Tajir\'s formula, which now brought Mr Salaam 25.5% of the total commission .
[9] Mr Livingstone\'s evidence \tMr Livingstone\'s evidence went through several changes .
He came before the court, of course, as one who had, without serving a defence, settled with Dubal on payment of $15,540,000 .
In his witness statement, which became his evidence in chief, he put the matter in this way .
In 1987 Mr Livingstone was concerned about the following aspects of Dubal\'s business: long term financial success required a fourth potline, but Mr Al Tajir informed him that the Ruler would not be willing to fund the expansion himself; expansion was unsafe without ensuring the availability of increased supplies of alumina at reasonable prices; as it was,  Alcoa was indicating that it no longer wished to continue as Dubal\'s exclusive supplier; tariff problems were causing difficulties in finding sufficient outlets for Dubal\'s premium products .
He discussed these problems with Mr Al Tajir, as he had always discussed Dubal\'s business with him .
He had always regarded Mr Al Tajir as the Ruler\'s representative in matters relating to Dubal, and continued to do so until March 1992, when a decree formally appointing a new Director of the Economic Department of the government made it clear that the Director would be the government\'s representative in Dubal .
He had never heard of Mr Al Tajir\'s resignation from his position as Director of the Ruler\'s Office .
Mr Al Tajir continued to function in relation to Dubal after 1981 as he had done before .
"He was the Ruler\'s man for Dubal and the Ruler remained with us until October 1990. .
His instructions were therefore always to be followed .
Mr Livingstone\'s own position depended on his approval .
\tMr Livingstone presented the Valo sales agreement and then the Richco alliance, as well as Mr Salaam\'s involvement in both, as taking their origin from his own suggestions to Mr Al Tajir .
However, in cross-examination he stated that Mr Salaam\'s involvement proceeded from Mr Al Tajir\'s wish, rather than his own (day 11, page 125) .
At any rate, Mr Salaam was involved because of his previous experience of Dubal\'s business via the GRC management agreement .
As for Richco, "I decided that Dubal\'s commercial interests would be best served by establishing a close commercial relationship or alliance with Richco .
In or about May 1987, I explained this to His Excellency Mahdi Al Tajir (in his capacity as Ruler\'s representative) .
His Excellency Mahdi Al Tajir agreed and asked me to enter into negotiations with Richco..." \tThe resultant Richco consultancy agreement was a commercial agreement, which made use of Richco\'s worldwide marketing strengths and financial intelligence .
The ASA would not have been possible on the terms agreed with Clarendon but for the consultancy agreement .
As it was, Dubal earned some $33m in 1988 and $45m in 1989 under the ASA .
\tWith Mr Al Tajir\'s approval, Mr Livingstone therefore began negotiating with Mr Rich ("I had known Marc Rich personally for many years") and with Mr Salaam .
It was always clear from the beginning that both Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam expected to receive payment in the event of the fruition of an alliance with Richco .
Nothing could be done without Mr Al Tajir\'s consent, and Mr Salaam felt that the alliance with Richco was his own idea, and it had grown out of discussion regarding the failed agency (Valo) arrangement .
In the one case approval, in the other case the germ of the idea, were the justifications for payment: and because of Mr Al Tajir\'s involvement, he, Mr Livingstone, believed the payments were authorised by the government .
The division of payment was discussed at lunch (at the Mirabelle restaurant in London) in mid 1987 .
Mr Salaam proposed, and Mr Al Tajir agreed a 40% (Mr Al Tajir), 30% (Mr Salaam) and 30% (Mr Livingstone) split .
The three of them were there .
That was the first time that he, Mr Livingstone, had known "for certain" that he too would be paid .
The fact that he was to receive payment "played no part whatsoever in my own reasons for committing Dubal to this arrangement" .
Mr Al Tajir told him that his salary could never be sufficient to recognise the extraordinary degree of responsibility which he carried or the progress that Dubal had made under his leadership .
\tThe negotiations with Mr Rich included Mr Livingstone himself .
Mr Salaam proposed a 20%/80% split, but this was not acceptable to Mr Rich and as a result discussions broke down for a while .
As, however, discussions developed for the ASA, so Mr Rich and Mr Salaam were prepared to agree a 50%/50% split with additional payments becoming due to Mr Salaam\'s companies on sales and purchases under the ASA .
\tWhen Saad Salaam complained to Mr Al Tajir with his demand to be included in the payments, Mr Al Tajir deputised Mr Livingstone to negotiate with Saad .
The result was that Mr Al Tajir was to remain entitled to 40%, Saad would receive 15%, and Mr Salaam and he would each receive 22.5% .
[10] \tThat was the effect of Mr Livingstone\'s evidence in chief, namely that the Richco scheme was a bona fide commercial arrangement, arising out of Dubal\'s needs as interpreted by Mr Livingstone, approved by Mr Al Tajir as representative of the government, and with the participants (other than Saad Salaam) being rewarded, in proportions approved again by Mr Al Tajir, for their respective roles in bringing the Richco alliance to fruition .
\tMr Livingstone\'s cross-examination fell into two very different halves .
It began on a Thursday, when he was cross-examined first by Mr Boswood on behalf of the Amhurst defendants and then by Mr Seymour on behalf of Dubal .
On that day Mr Livingstone was compliant with his cross-examiners .
I have already quoted above from some of his answers in relation to the GRC management agreement .
He also gave the following testimony .
He accepted that the Richco scheme could not have gone ahead without his participation, since to him would fall the responsibility of explaining to his fellow employees at Dubal and to Dubal\'s auditors what the Richco consultancy agreement was about .
He accepted that he was the "paymaster, as it were", ie held responsible by Mr Al Tajir for seeing what happened to the money, in charge of ensuring that receipts (from Richco) and payments were correctly dealt with .
In this connection he identified a Richco accounting document which had been sent to him dated 5 October 1988, marked " Attn .
Mr. Livingstone", which he accepted had presumably been sent to him because Richco "knew that I was the person who, if you like, they had to account to for these things" .
He accepted that he acted in this capacity primarily for Mr Al Tajir, but also incidentally for Mr Salaam .
When in March/April 1991 the subsidiary agreements were paid up and bought out by Richco in the form of capitalised payments, it was Mr Livingstone who handled those arrangements with Richco on behalf of the participants .
He was also involved in the arrangements made in September 1988 for a bogus option undertaken between Clarendon and Dubal under which Clarendon paid $3,000,000 to Nillet, and which, when unscrambled, led to the need to repay the $3m: Mr Livingstone said that the $3m had originally gone to Mr Salaam, "who had problems with his cashflow", and that when the money had to be repaid, it came out of his, Mr Livingstone\'s, own pocket .
\tThere was another bogus option for $2.6 million arranged by Mr Livingstone in December 1988: it was Dubal who this time paid that money to Richco as the price of the option, and Clarendon in due course paid that money on to an account in Zurich for the benefit of Metal Production Consultants, a company under the control of M & F Engineering, in payment of the cost of hiring aircraft in connection with Mr Al Tajir\'s shuttle diplomacy in the Lebanese peace process .
Mr Livingstone explained (day 10, page 38ff): \t"A.\t....These were substantial bills which really had nothing to do with [Dubal] and I was charged with finding a way in which to settle the matter... \tQ.\tSo you were quite happy to generate an entirely bogus and fraudulent option agreement in order to cover the repayment to M & F Engineering of expenses it had apparently incurred on behalf of Mr Tajir; is that right .
\tA.\tBut I have to repeat to you what I said before .
I believed that if I was instructed to do something by Mr Tajir then it was all right for Dubal .
That was my position then and it remains my position today .
\tQ.\tHow could it possibly have been all right for Dubal to pay, through these bogus transactions, Mr Tajir\'s travel expenses .
What did they have to do with Dubal .
\tA.\tIt may not seem right in this court, Mr Boswood, but this was not in this court and it was not today, it was some years ago in Dubai and things were different... \tQ.\tBecause there was nothing improper, because you say Mr Tajir told you it was all right .
Not only that, there was nothing improper about simply using Dubal as a sort of piggy bank to pay Mr Tajir\'s travel expenses, or indeed any other expenses he chose to have paid, or provide him with any other money if he said he wanted it; is that true .
\tA.\tI think you are exaggerating slightly but there is something in what you say, yes .
\tQ.\tIn order to make it all look proper on the face of it, because after all there were people like auditors, both internal and external I suppose, who might ask questions, it was necessary to generate these bogus documents rather than simply writing a cheque for Mr Tajir\'s travel expenses .
\tA.\tYes .
One was living in two different worlds, Mr Boswood, I should add, simultaneously...   \tQ.\t...One world was the world in which it was perfectly proper to receive $13 million .
What was the other world .
\tA.\tThe world of the other people in the business, of the normal business of the company, of which there was a great deal... \tMR .
JUSTICE RIX:The other world was the normal business world of running an alumina smelter .
\tA.\tExactly, sir, yes .
\tMR .
BOSWOOD:In that world payments have to be made for the proper purposes of the company, payments have to be properly vouched and documented and so on; is that right .
\tA.\tExactly .
\tQ.\tSo would it have been possible simply to, for example look at this transaction, openly write a cheque for $2.6 million in favour of M & F Engineering against an entry in the company\'s books "Reimbursement of Mr Tajir\'s travel expenses" .
\tA.\tI think that would have been looked at askance, as they say. .
\tThus far Mr Livingstone was answering to Mr Boswood .
Later in the day, in answer to Mr Seymour, he became franker still, and all but dropped the defence that Mr Tajir\'s authority made such arrangements proper in the "other" world of Dubai .
Thus, in connection with the GRC management agreement, in the passage I have already cited, he was prepared to agree that that contract was inter alia "a means of abstracting cash from Dubal" .
His cross-examination then turned to the Richco consultancy agreement (at day 10, page 92ff): \tQ.\tAnd that is what happened, in due course, when we got to the Richco Consultancy Agreement, is it not .
\tA.\tNo that was different .
That was different in the sense that in that case, as I think you heard from Mr Strothotte, it was a very valid argument commercially and industrially for the kind of alliance that I wanted to build and which Richco could see some great benefit in .
I think he has already explained that to you and I could not have done it better myself .
That is a little different, I think, to this .
But, nevertheless, in this case, there were grievous needs that the company had .
We needed help; we were struggling .
We had, the biggest risk was, of course, the whole thing would stall and then the Ruler of Dubai would be up to his hocksters for hundreds of millions if not billions .
If the plant did not succeed, if it did not start and produce and sell metal, consequences would be catastrophic for Dubai, not just for the Dubal .
\tQ.\t I am sure you are not suggesting to his Lordship that that is in any sense a justification for stealing money from Dubal .
\tA.\t No, but it was a justification - there was a need for services and these proposals came along and I could see a need to go along with them .
This is the position, as I have stated it before .
\tQ.\t So what you are telling his Lordship perhaps amounts to this, that you knew perfectly well that insofar as the sums payable under the GRC Management Agreement exceeded reasonable remuneration for whatever services were provided, money was being stolen from Dubal .
It was not your idea, but you got some of it; is that what it amounts to .
\tA.\t If you wish to put it that way .
\tQ.\t Can we not put those essentials really as the description of the Richco Consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements, that, whether there were any services provided or not, a function of the agreement was to provide a pretext for abstracting very large sums of money from Dubal for your benefit, Mr Al Tajir\'s benefit and Mr Salaam\'s benefit .
\tA.\tRight .
A little further on (at pages 108/9) there was also the following passage: \tQ.\tYou have told his Lordship that you became involved in the GRC agreement and in receiving a share of the money paid under this agreement because you were asked to do so .
\tA.\tRight .
\tQ.\tYou were asked by Mr Al Tajir .
\tA.\tYes .
\tQ.\tOnly Mr Al Tajir .
\tA.\tMr Salaam was aware of this and wanted to have my involvement, of course .
As the person running the company, I could understand why he wanted that involvement very well, but I was asked by both of them, yes .
\tQ.\tWere you asked by both of them to become involved in the Richco Consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreement .
\tA.\tYes .
\tQ.\tYou appreciated at all times, did you not, that in asking you to become involved they were inviting you to join them in a dishonest scheme .
\tA.\tYes, I would have to I think explain, my Lord, that, whilst these two gentlemen were involved, really the central person from my point of view was Mr Tajir .
He was the person who had, as I perceived it, and I believe reasonably, the authority in order to approve these arrangements, whatever we may think of them here .
So it was really primarily to Mr Tajir that I looked .
\tMr Livingstone\'s cross-examination continued on the following Monday: he was then cross-examined by Mr Nigel Davis QC on behalf of Mr Salaam and by Mr Ali Malek QC on behalf of Mr Al Tajir .
When cross-examined on behalf of Mr Salaam, he was led, by counsel\'s skilful guidance, to re-emphasise anew his implicit reliance on Mr Al Tajir\'s authority and his belief in the honesty of what had been done in the context of the Dubai of the day .
For instance (at day 11, pages 31/2): \tQ.\tWas it your perception that Sheikh Hamdan left it to people like Mr Tajir to get things done .
\tA.\tWell, I think I have said in my evidence, and I would like to repeat it, that I had the impression, gained over many years with the chairman, that he really did not give the impression that he thought Dubal was his business .
He may say differently now, he may say differently now, but that was the impression I got over many years .
This was business that was started by Mr Tajir with his [Hamdan\'s] father, and I had a distinct impression that he really did not want to get involved in it .
There had to be some reason why he would never respond, never intervene, never come and see the place or talk about it with interest and concern, and that was the only reason I could come up with .
\tQ.\tYour perception was that Sheikh Hamdan thought that Dubal was Mr Tajir\'s turf .
\tA.\tExactly .
This was a business that he had created with the blessing of His Highness The Ruler .
Yes, Sheikh Hamdan was appointed as chairman, but that was just running up the Dubai flag .
It had no impact on the way the business was run .
\tAt day 11, page 47/8 he was asked about the passage on day 10 where he had conceded that the Richco consultancy agreement had been part of a dishonest scheme: \tQ.\tSo you say Mr Tajir was the person who had, as you perceived it, and you believe reasonably, the authority in order to approve these arrangements .
\tA.\tRight .
\tQ.\tThe authority of whom .
\tA.\tOf the Ruler .
\tQ.\tSo it would be right to say that your perception was that this was not a dishonest scheme .
\tA.\tNo .
I mean, I know there is this magic word, yes, at the beginning of the thing, but if you look later on I say "Whatever we may think of them here", so I am making the same point as I have just made this morning, this whole thing is taken out of context .
In the context of Dubai, at the time, this was absolutely normal .
\tQ.\tYou considered that this had the authority of the Ruler .
\tA.\tYes, I do .
\tQ.\tThrough Mr Tajir .
\tA.\tYes, and I believe that such things had been going on for 30 years or more, 30/40 years .
It is possible, if I may say so, my Lord, that the present Rulers of Dubai do not like this idea, they think it should be changed...But at the time, I assure you, it was perfectly normal..." \tWhen cross-examined on behalf of Mr Al Tajir, however, his position reverted to at least the implicit acknowledgment of dishonesty .
Thus he was asked why he had not sought to defend himself against the proceedings which Dubal had brought against him by seeking to implicate Mr Al Tajir, in reliance on the latter\'s legitimate authority in Dubai to promote the scheme .
His reply was that he had gone to see him, but "it was quite clear from that he was not prepared to undertake any responsibility of any kind" (day 11, page 85) .
There was then this passage (at page 87): \tQ.\tI suggest the reason that you did not seek to blame Mr Tajir or to say that he had authorised this was that you knew perfectly well that he could not be implicated and was not implicated in your fraud on Dubal .
\tA.\tWell he was determined not to be implicated, but that was another matter .
\tHe was also asked about the origins of the scheme, and the involvement of Mr Salaam .
He said that Mr Al Tajir as well as he wanted Mr Salaam to be involved; and that it was he, Mr Livingstone, who had negotiated with Mr Rich .
He did not think that Mr Al Tajir had even made so much as an initial approach to Mr Rich, or had ever met him .
He disputed Mr Al Tajir\'s case that the latter had entered into a separate commission arrangement with Mr Rich .
He had no idea whether Richco knew at the time that he was going to receive a percentage of the fees - it was not something that he had ever discussed with Mr Strothotte .
Mr Al Tajir\'s evidence \tI have already found that Mr Al Tajir did resign from his position as Director of the Ruler\'s Office in 1981, as indeed he had stated in his witness statement .
His evidence, which of course was not cross-examined, continued to the following effect .
He said that he had become friends with Mr Livingstone and saw him from time to time as such, but that he had no further role after 1981 in the administration of Dubai .
Sometime in 1986 his response to Mr Livingstone\'s telling him about his concerns for Dubal was that he should go to see his chairman, Sheikh Hamdan, about them .
In 1987 in a similar conversation Mr Livingstone informed him that the management of Dubal had identified Richco as the company with which to form a strategic alliance to assist Dubal in its pressing problems .
He was asked if he would assist Dubal in approaching Mr Rich, his good friend and neighbour in St Moritz, personally .
He regarded Mr Livingstone as completely honest, and was delighted to be given the opportunity of involvement in so prestigious a project .
He assumed that the matter had been discussed with Sheikh Hamdan and the latter\'s close confidant Mr Al Tayer, the minister of finance and industry .
He therefore contacted Mr Rich initially by telephone and then in a meeting in St Moritz or Zug (Richco\'s headquarters) .
Mr Rich suggested that "his people" meet Mr Livingstone to discuss actual figures .
It was agreed with Mr Rich that in the event of any deal he, Mr Al Tajir, would be looking for 1% of the value of the transaction .
He reported all this back to Mr Livingstone .
At about this time, Mr Salaam told him that he had also been approached by Mr Livingstone to assist him on a deal with Mr Rich .
He did not tell Mr Salaam about his own involvement .
He subsequently raised the question of Mr Salaam\'s role with Mr Livingstone, and was told that Mr Salaam was needed for his experience in transnational commercial transactions .
He warned Mr Livingstone to check with Sheikh Hamdan, and was told that Mr Livingstone had already done so .
He played no part in the implementation of arrangements with Richco .
He was unaware of the subsidiary agreements .
He had a further meeting with Mr Rich in late 1987 or early in 1988, and frequent meetings with Mr Strothotte in connection with mutual business relating to power engineering and infrastructure projects in the middle east, but he was never told of Mr Salaam\'s involvement in the Richco deal, nor of any payments to Mr Livingstone .
As far as he had been aware, he had never himself received any payments deriving from the Richco deal, until Richco had itself disclosed such details .
[11]  He explained this as follows: "...I did not even realise that any separate monies had been paid purportedly connected with this transaction by Richco, simply because monies had been paid to Altajir Limited anonymously and distributed without reference to me .
As we were always receiving large sums of money from Richco during this period, and I did not handle specific or detailed accounts of the companies in which I was involved, (instead delegating these duties to respective managers , employees  and members of family, etc .
), I saw no reason to "chase" Marc Rich when I knew from a global point of view of all Altajir\'s family businesses that huge sums were coming in from Richco .
This encompassed all businesses with Richco, including business ventures other than Dubal, including commodity trading with Iran...hundreds of millions of pounds were going through numerous companies connected with the Altajir family...." \tAs for Mr Saad Salaam, Saad had requested him on one occasion to ask Mr Salaam to honour a long standing business arrangement between the brothers, whereby Saad was to receive a share of the profits of any business in the Gulf .
He acted on that request, but without involving himself in any details, and subsequently learned from Saad that the matter had been resolved to his satisfaction .
\tIn effect, therefore, his evidence was to distance himself from both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, and indeed from the whole transaction .
Mr Strothotte\'s evidence \tIn the absence of any evidence from Mr Marc Rich himself, the only evidence from Richco came from Mr Strothotte .
That evidence was also presented as Dubal\'s own evidence .
It was to the following effect .
\tIn late spring or early summer of 1987 (we now know that it was on 26 or 27 May), Mr Rich and Mr Pincus Green (the latter being Richco\'s President - there has been no evidence from him either) came into Mr Strothotte\'s office to say that they had that day met Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam .
[12]  Mr Strothotte had met Mr Livingstone before, but not Mr Salaam (or Mr Al Tajir) .
Mr Rich had said that a commercial alliance had been proposed, the starting point of which would be a consultancy agreement .
Dubal would pay a monthly fee plus a commission on sales of aluminium .
A proportion of these fees and commissions would have to be paid to beneficiaries to be nominated by Dubal .
It was made clear that this was the way that business was done in Dubai and that Richco would not get the business otherwise .
Dubal had proposed the passing over of 80% of the fees, but Mr Rich thought that too high .
He, Mr Strothotte, regarded Mr Livingstone as in executive control of Dubal, and Mr Al Tajir as a man of considerable political influence, who filled a power vacuum left by the inactivity of the sick Ruler\'s sons: the scheme therefore appeared to be approved by the government of Dubai .
He did not know how Mr Salaam came to be involved, but he understood from Mr Rich that he was an associate of Mr Al Tajir .
Mr Livingstone introduced Mr Amhurst as the solicitor who would be drawing up the agreements .
Mr Livingstone was very much in control of their form .
The subsidiary agreements were obviously a cosmetic arrangement, and there was never any question of them being performed .
They were "clearly vehicles for payment" .
Nevertheless, in accepting them he relied on the executive authority of Mr Livingstone, the political standing of Mr Al Tajir, and the involvement of an apparently reputable London solicitor, Mr Amhurst .
In any event, without the consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements, Dubal would have taken the business elsewhere .
He did not, however, then know that Mr Livingstone was one of the beneficiaries of the subsidiary agreements .
\tThe ASA was worked upon at the same time, and this was toughly negotiated, and was a good deal for Dubal, even though subsequent amendments to it worked to Richco\'s advantage .
From time to time during the life of the scheme, Mr Livingstone made approaches on behalf of his principals (one of whom was clearly Mr Al Tajir) for more funds, eg for $55 per tonne on quantities of aluminium bought by Richco under the 1989 Pre-Sales Agreement, or for an additional $10 per tonne on alumina sales, or, ultimately, for the capitalisation and payment "up front" of all monies due under the subsidiary agreements, including for these purposes the additional $10 per tonne on alumina sales .
He understood Mr Livingstone to be under pressure from "people on his back", who clearly included Mr Al Tajir .
Richco agreed to make the capitalised payments, but only against the security of a Performance Bond dated 18 February 1991 to secure future payment of sums due to Dubal under the Richco consultancy agreement, which continued .
The capitalised payments were made in March/April 1991 .
\tAlthough Mr Strothotte was clearly of the view that the subsidiary agreements were cosmetic or sham agreements, and that  no performance was ever expected to be rendered under them, or was in fact rendered under them, he also said that to the extent of Richco\'s interest in 50% of the 2.5% fee on Dubal\'s sales, the Richco consultancy agreement was a valid agreement, under which Richco rendered Dubal valuable services which were commensurate with Richco\'s earnings .
His view of the Richco consultancy agreement itself therefore fell into two parts .
To the extent that it was the means by which Dubal provided a flow of money to Richco, which Richco would then divert to payment of similar fees under the subsidiary agreements, it was a dishonest sham; but to the extent that it provided, when viewed against the scheme as a whole, in effect for 50% of the 2.5% fee on sales to remain with Richco, it was a valid, real and honest agreement, under which Richco earned what it was awarded .
This appeared more clearly from his cross-examination than from his evidence in chief itself .
Thus in the latter, he plainly termed the subsidiary agreements mere vehicles for payment, without expressing a view as to the status of the primary agreement - other than in a passage where he explained Richco\'s reasons for arriving at a settlement with Dubal in 1993 .
In that passage he accepted the whole scheme as improper, for he said: "...the main reason for the 1993 settlement was the need to dissociate the company from the Consultancy/Nillet arrangement which now seemed improper..." "Nillet" was the term under which he referred to the four subsidiary agreements and the reference to "Consultancy" was therefore a reference to the primary agreement with Richco itself .
\tIn his cross-examination, however, he was, at any rate to the extent of that 1.25% fee, less apologetic .
Thus, in response to questions from counsel on behalf of the Salaam and Amhurst defendants and Mr Livingstone, who were seeking to elicit evidence to meet Dubal\'s opening submission that the Richco consultancy agreement was itself a mere sham, he gave answers such as the following: \tQ.\tOf course, your position was and is, as I understand it from the answers you have given to my learned friend Mr Davis, that the Consultancy agreement, the Richco Consultancy agreement, was a perfectly proper agreement for Dubal to have entered into under which it could have expected to receive and did receive real and proper benefits .
\tA.\tYes .
(day 5, page 23); or \tQ.\tThe Consultancy agreement was, as you have said several times, in your, Richco\'s, understanding, an entirely proper, arm\'s length commercial agreement under which Dubal could have received and did receive material benefits .
\tA.\tYes .
(day 5, page 108) I interpolate the comment that such questioning from parties in the same interest shows the limits of cross-examination in such circumstances .
On any view of the matter, it was not Mr Strothotte\'s evidence, other than in words put in his mouth, that the Richco consultancy agreement was a "perfectly proper agreement"; and as for the suggestion that it was an "arm\'s length" agreement, that was flatly contradictory to other evidence that Mr Strothotte gave .
The fees which Dubal was to pay under the Richco consultancy agreement were pushed on Richco by Dubal (of course to fund the subsidiary agreements) rather than negotiated by Richco for its own account on an "entirely proper, arm\'s length commercial" basis .
More helpful perhaps was the following exchange: \tQ.\t If I could ask you about performance under the Consultancy agreement .
At the time you negotiated the Consultancy agreement, was it your understanding that you were not required to provide any services to Dubal in return for the 1.25 per cent you were to receive .
\tA.\t No, it was not our understanding that we were not to provide any service .
It was clearly the understanding that we would, through this Consultancy agreement, have a basis of exchange between us .
It was sort of my feeling that it would not take the form as prescribed and be much more active and alive, which it then became .
So the service in terms of there was of course regular dialogue on market exchanges, but these things took place at the level of the operating people and frequently with the inclusion of Livingstone, yes .
(day 5, page 144) \tPerhaps the equivocal line that Mr Strothotte was trying to maintain emerged in this answer: \tQ.\t To the best of your knowledge, were there any aspects of the commercial alliance which were disadvantageous to Dubal .
\tA.\t No .
\tQ.\t To the best of your knowledge, were there any aspects of the commercial alliance which were in fraud of Dubal .
\tA.\t I do not know about fraud .
The part of the Consultancy agreement which was part, which was the document governing the alliance where payments were to be passed on were the part that, you know, we did not understand and we did not know to whose benefit that was .
We were interested in the commercial side of it, and that was beneficial to Dubal and Richco .
(day 6, page 14) \tAt the end of his evidence I asked Mr Strothotte whether in effect it was only 20% of the 2.5% fee, ie a fee of 0.5%, that was retained by Richco, and not 50%, by reason of the provisions in the subsidiary agreements for the payment of the $5s and $2s .
It will be recalled that Richco had been only willing to pass on 50% of the 2.5% until the ASA was also negotiated, and then had been willing to make up the difference between 50% and 80% of the 2.5% fee by means of the $5s and the $2s .
He gave a somewhat confused answer to my question, but in final submissions Mr Temple QC on behalf of Richco accepted that this was in fact the case, that Richco was to retain in effect only 0.5% .
I therefore regard Mr Strothotte\'s evidence as amounting to this: a commercial alliance between Richco and Dubal made sense, but Richco\'s interest in the consultancy agreement was ultimately for only 20% of the 2.5% fee on sales, in return for which proper services were rendered to Dubal, albeit not in the form provided for in the consultancy agreement itself, but in terms of a "regular dialogue on market exchanges" .
Dubal\'s other evidence \tDubal also relied on certain witness statements admitted under the Civil Evidence Act, and which were not therefore the subject of cross-examination .
The most important of these was the statement of Sheikh Hamdan .
\tSheikh Hamdan\'s main concern, apart from dealing with the matter of Mr Al Tajir\'s succession by Sheikh Mohamed as effective director of the Ruler\'s Affairs and Petroleum Affairs in 1981, was to oppose the evidence given by Mr Livingstone to the effect that he had taken no interest as chairman in Dubal\'s affairs, and had left matters to his executives and to Mr Al Tajir .
He said that he was always available at his majlis  [13]  for any meeting which Mr Livingstone desired, and that he did meet Mr Livingstone regularly to discuss Dubal\'s affairs .
He had only once been asked by Mr Livingstone to sign Dubal\'s accounts, and that was after the (Price Waterhouse) report which had thrown up the question of the substantial payments being generated by the GRC management agreement .
He had refused to sign them pending further investigations .
As for the Richco consultancy agreement, he did not recall being informed of any intention to enter into any such agreement .
He added: "In the light of what had been discovered about the GRC Consultancy Agreement, I know that I would not have consented to a further consultancy agreement being entered into unless first satisfied that the making of such an agreement was in the best interests of the company .
In any event, I am absolutely sure that Mr Livingstone did not tell me that it was intended Dubal would enter into a consultancy agreement with a third party as a means by which substantial sums of money were to be paid by Dubal to either himself or Mr Salaam or Mr Altajir. .
\tMr Dilip Koshy has since 1994 been head of the internal audit unit of Dubal .
He has had special responsibility for locating all  files relevant to the Livingstone or current proceedings brought by Dubal .
His witness statement says that he is confident that if documents existed relating to the following topics, he would have found them, but he has not .
There are no documents, whether in report form, or in informal form, relating to any market research or market intelligence information provided by Richco to Dubal; there are no documents prior to September 1987 suggesting Dubal\'s inability to sell its products at satisfactory prices; there are no documents prior to September 1987 suggesting or investigating a problem in relation to the supply of alumina;  there are no documents which suggest that Dubal was receiving any instructions from or having contact with Mr Al Tajir as a representative of the government of Dubai, or at all (other than in the context of projects outside Dubai, eg a smelter project in Iran); and there are no documents relating to the proposed Valo sales agency .
\tMr Farhad Pochkhanawala, Dubal\'s finance manager since 1989, also provided a witness statement in which he said that as finance manager he became a member of the Pricing Committee, whose role was to review market information and advise on pricing and hedging strategies for the benefit of Mr Livingstone and Mr Alawi, the sales manager .
At the meetings of that committee, expert reports would be considered, but there was never any written report from Richco nor any verbal reports attributed to Richco .
The evidence regarding the origins of the Richco scheme reviewed \tWhat does this evidence suggest .
I put it this way, because final conclusions will have to await the investigation of other matters such as the distribution of the monies via the subsidiary agreements .
For the moment, however, I would draw the following provisional insights from this evidence .
\tFirst, each of Mr Salaam, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir claimed to have been the instrumental party in effecting the alliance with Richco through an initial approach to Marc Rich .
Thus, Mr Salaam\'s evidence was that, although it had been Mr Al Tajir who approached him about this matter of an alliance with Richco, it was he, Mr Salaam, who was asked by Mr Al Tajir to negotiate the alliance with Mr Rich .
Mr Al Tajir, on the other hand, said that although the initial idea of an alliance with Richco had come from Mr Livingstone, it was he, Mr Al Tajir, who had made the initial contact with his friend and neighbour Mr Rich .
And Mr Livingstone said that it was he himself who had both developed the strategy of an alliance with Richco and had negotiated it with Mr Rich, who was personally known to him .
In my judgment, each of these three protagonists was interested to be seen as the ultimate forger of the alliance because that role could best be viewed as earning the justification of an introductory commission .
Yet, of course, the accolade of being the forger of the alliance could not fall on each .
In the absence of any evidence from Mr Rich himself, I have to approach this issue with circumspection .
It seems to me, however, that the most likely answer is that the initial contact was made by Mr Al Tajir .
That was Mr Salaam\'s view of the matter, that it had been Mr Al Tajir who had set up the initial meeting that he and Mr Livingstone attended with Mr Rich in Zug .
Mr Livingstone may have been Dubal\'s chief executive, but it was Mr Rich and Mr Al Tajir who were the world business men, principals rather than employees: and it seems to me to be altogether more likely that the meetings of 26/27 May 1987 in Zug had been preceded by some private conversation between Mr Rich and Mr Al Tajir .
That was in a sense also Mr Strothotte\'s understanding from Mr Rich, that Mr Al Tajir had been involved (as well as the two visitors to Zug): but I pay less regard to that, since Mr Strothotte was obviously mistaken to think, as he had originally said, that Mr Rich had reported having had a joint meeting with Messrs Al Tajir, Livingstone and Salaam in Zug; and in any event what Mr Rich said to Mr Strothotte was merely hearsay .
\tSecondly, if Mr Al Tajir made the initial contact with Mr Rich, it is nevertheless reasonably clear that the original concept of the alliance came from Mr Livingstone, or at any rate developed out of his conversations and discussions with Mr Al Tajir and/or Mr Salaam .
That is the effect of Mr Al Tajir\'s and Mr Livingstone\'s evidence; and Mr Salaam\'s evidence was not inconsistent with that .
It is also a matter of common sense: it was Mr Livingstone who alone of the three lived his whole business life in the world of Dubal .
\tThirdly, I find that the three protagonists were well used to working with one another in such a venture .
They had all been involved together previously in the GRC management agreement, and had all received financial benefits out of it .
Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone appear to have remained close associates throughout the period which this judgment covers, even down to today .
Mr Livingstone had been a director of GRC during the period of the GRC management agreement .
Following Mr Livingstone\'s departure from Dubal and Dubai, Mr Salaam was able to offer him a consultancy appointment with GRC .
They still play golf together, at any rate up to the recent past .
Similarly, there was a business partnership of a kind between Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir, and they were working together at the material time on the Lebanon peace process .
Furthermore, it is clear from Mr Livingstone\'s and Mr Strothotte\'s evidence that Mr Livingstone was prepared to act on behalf of Mr Al Tajir (and Mr Salaam) for instance in negotiating further payments from Richco .
He was also trusted by both Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam in resolving the claims of Mr Saad Salaam .
Where trust to a common end might be necessary, the three knew each other well and could obviously work together .
\tFourthly, there is an ambivalency about the status of the monies generated by the scheme .
Mr Al Tajir\'s stance is the most clear cut, in that he seeks to say that his 40% was negotiated directly with Mr Rich as the price he charged to Richco for introducing it to Dubal .
Even so, this was plainly a price which would have to come out of Richco\'s earnings: and Mr Al Tajir appears to have shown little concern about how such earnings were to be generated or priced, leaving all such matters to Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam to negotiate .
Moreover, Mr Al Tajir\'s further demands for compensation in the form of the $55s and the $10s, even though those payments are not themselves the subject matter of a claim for recovery in these proceedings, show that he was willing to require payment to him that went beyond an introductory commission .
In any event, the evidence of Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, which Mr Al Tajir was not in a position to contradict, that he was himself a party to the agreement that the monies generated by the scheme were to be divided 40%/30%/30% between the three protagonists, strongly suggests that Mr Al Tajir\'s position was no different from those of Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone .
Indeed, if he was to get 40%, and the  other two were to get 30% each, it followed that the cake which was being divided was shared not between him and Richco, which was what his evidence had sought to suggest, but between him and Messrs Salaam and Livingstone .
If he was to get 40% of what Richco was to earn out of the alliance, and Messrs Salaam and Livingstone were to share 60%, then there was nothing left for Richco .
Such calculations are simply incompatible with his basic case of a separate deal made between him and Mr Rich for 40% of Richco\'s earnings .
\tMr Salaam and Mr Livingstone were more ambivalent about the source of their earnings under the scheme .
Mr Salaam also sought to say that his companies\' earnings under the subsidiary agreements were essentially an introductory commission .
But a commission from whom .
From Richco, for introducing it to Dubal, or from Dubal for introducing it to Richco .
This was never made entirely clear, and there were elements of both rationalia in his evidence: but, of course, the fact that the source of the monies was to come from Dubal and to flow through the subsidiary agreements made it difficult to represent the payments as being made by Richco rather than Dubal .
Thus the "mobilisation fee" of $2m and the monthly payments of $85,000 were even said by Mr Salaam to reflect the agreements previously negotiated directly between Valo and Dubal .
Certainly Mr Strothotte understood all these payments, including the 2.5% to the extent that that was being passed on, as the payment of commissions "indirectly" by Dubal .
As he said in his witness statement: "I was not particularly surprised that Dubal wanted to pay commissions indirectly .
It seemed to me that politically, or for some other reason, it was unacceptable for Dubal to pay direct, and the concept of State companies in developing countries distributing funds to favoured individuals or companies was consistent with what I had heard about such dealings..." \tMr Livingstone, perhaps even more than Mr Salaam, accepted that the fees were being paid by Dubal, rather than Richco .
The money was "abstracted" from Dubal (even if that was with the authority of Mr Al Tajir) .
It was not something he had stipulated for, he had no entitlement to it, but it was in the form of a bonus from his employer, Dubal, authorised by Mr Al Tajir, in recognition of his responsibilities, achievements and leadership .
\tUltimately, the fact that both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone relied on the authority of Mr Al Tajir and on the custom and practice of Dubai showed that their thesis was that their commissions or other payments came from Dubal, rather than Richco .
\tFifthly, the episode about Mr Saad Salaam is instructive .
Saad played no role whatever in the scheme, its genesis or its execution .
Nevertheless, Mr Al Tajir supported, and Mr Livingstone was left to engineer, Saad\'s cut in the proceeds .
Mr Salaam had to suffer it, plainly against his will .
Equally plainly, neither Richco nor Dubal received any value from Saad Salaam .
This may therefore indicate the importance of Mr Al Tajir\'s role in the scheme, but it also further indicates the difficulty of Mr Al Tajir\'s position that his only involvement was as the man who broked a deal for Richco\'s benefit and was paid by Richco out of its own resources .
He not only proposed (Mr Salaam\'s evidence) or agreed (Mr Livingstone\'s evidence) the 40%/30%/30% split, but then threw his weight behind a reallocation of that split to accommodate Saad\'s demands .
\tSixthly, for reasons which I have already sought to make plain, the reliance which both Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, and through Mr Strothotte to some lesser extent also Richco, sought to place on the authority of Mr Al Tajir as representative of the Ruler of Dubai and owner of Dubal cannot be accepted .
Mr Al Tajir was no longer vested with that authority: and it is impossible to accept that Mr Livingstone or Mr Salaam, or even Mr Rich, can have supposed that Mr Al Tajir was still vested with the Ruler\'s authority .
\tSeventhly, in any event, it is reasonably plain that Mr Salaam did not even rely on Mr Al Tajir\'s authority in respect of all elements of Richco\'s payments under the subsidiary agreements .
There is no evidence that Mr Al Tajir knew about the payment of the $2m mobilisation fee, or the monthly payments of $85,000 .
If he had done, he would have stipulated for his 40% share: for his evidence was that he had agreed with Mr Rich that he would get 40% of the value of the transaction .
One possible reason why the on-payments by Richco were divided between four subsidiary agreements was that Mr Al Tajir was not supposed to know about, and thus was not to share in, the payments generated outside the second version of the JMS agreement .
It is true that Mr Salaam explained the curtailment of the JMS agreement from a minimum of ten years in its first version to only seven years in its second version as something that had been agreed with Mr Al Tajir at the outset .
If that is so, however, it is difficult to know why the JMS agreement in its first version did not reflect that agreement with Mr Al Tajir, or why the Wid agreement only entered at the stage of the second version of the JMS agreement; or, indeed, why Mr Al Tajir should have been prepared to forego any payment during the last three years of the Richco consultancy agreement - especially as that agreement might have continued evergreen for many more years than ten .
I am left with a feeling of deep scepticism as to whether Mr Al Tajir was permitted to know all the ins and outs of the scheme as negotiated by Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone .
The impression that I have is one that reflects the "cut-throat" defences of the three main protagonists before me: that theirs was a coming together of convenience, but not of candour; of intrigue, but not of integrity .
The receipts  \tI will now set out the course of the payments and receipts generated by the scheme .
The details are taken from the evidence of Mr Tony Horat, an operations manager with Richco who had been responsible for arranging the onward payments under the scheme, subject to the supervision of Mr Strothotte .
Among the documents annexed to his two witness statements was a schedule (the "Horat schedule") appended to Mr Horat\'s first witness statement as part of its Appendix 1 .
It contains a helpful summary of all sums received by Richco pursuant to the Richco consultancy agreement and paid out by Richco pursuant to the subsidiary agreements, as well as, in addition, details of the further payments made by Richco of $10 per tonne of alumina sold to Dubal by Clarendon .
Further details, prepared by Mr Horat, of the additional payments made by Richco of $55 per tonne of aluminium sold by Dubal to Richco were included on a revised version of the Horat schedule, served under cover of Messrs Clyde & Co\'s letter of 8 May 1997 as particulars of payments made by Richco, and confirmed by Mr Horat in his second witness statement (the "revised Horat schedule") .
\tPayments of the $5s and $2s (and of the $10s) were in fact made by Clarendon rather than Richco, because Clarendon was the Richco subsidiary which was responsible for alumina .
Mr Horat said that for internal accounting purposes  "there would have been a transfer by Richco to Clarendon of the funds received from Dubal under the Consultancy Agreement to enable Clarendon to make payment out to the Beneficiaries. .
\tIt seems to me not to matter whether those internal accounting entries were made or not .
It was Richco who was responsible under the subsidiary agreements for making the requisite payments; and if Richco procured a discharge of its obligations under those agreements by getting Clarendon to make the necessary payments, that is a matter of pure mechanics .
What the proper state of the books as between Richco and Clarendon was or ought to have been, is not a question which I need to enquire into .
\tFor the most part, payments by Richco (by which I mean to embrace, for the reason just stated, payments made by Clarendon) were made within a few days after the corresponding payment was received by Richco from Dubal .
Occasionally, however, Richco would make a payment out before receipt of the corresponding payment from Dubal .
These, however, were the exceptions: an example is that in January, April and July 1989 Richco made payment out in respect of the quarterly payments of (50% of) the 2.5% commission and of the $5s up to some four weeks or so earlier than Richco\'s corresponding receipt of the 2.5% commission from Dubal .
Mr Horat assumes that advanced payment of these amounts was requested on behalf of the beneficiaries .
While such advance payments illustrate a variation on the mechanics of the scheme, they do not in my judgment affect anything in principle .
Richco was prepared to make the advance in anticipation of the receipt of the corresponding funds .
If the corresponding funds had failed to materialise, the scheme would have been in peril of failing .
Another, but different, example of advance payments is to be found in the capitalised payments made in March/April 1991: these payments, discounted for early receipt, otherwise reflected the earning stream under the subsidiary agreements throughout the remaining course of their lives .
[14]   After these capitalised payments were made, the subsidiary agreements (other than the Wid agreement) were paid up and terminated, and only the primary agreement continued to operate, with Richco receiving payments of 2.5% commission on sales and of $85,000 per month .
However, Richco made sure that these payments were secured by requiring Dubal to enter into a Performance Bond as part of the agreement for the capitalised payments .
\tMr Salaam sought to rely on such exceptions as undermining Dubal\'s claim .
Whatever might have been the position if Dubal\'s claim rested on the need to trace funds, the claim in these proceedings for equitable compensation for knowing assistance in the breach of a fiduciary duty ultimately makes all such tracing issues superfluous .
In any event, the reality of the situation is that Richco made these advance payments only because it had been promised the receipt of the corresponding funds under its primary agreement with Dubal, and, in the case of the capitalised payments, because of the additional security of the Performance Bond .
\tTurning to the detail of Richco\'s receipts and payments, I find as follows .
\tThe first versions of the JMS and Valo agreements were signed on 1 September 1987 .
On 4 September 1987 Dubal paid to Richco, and on 8 September 1987 Richco paid on to Valo at the Fidelity Bank, London, the mobilisation fee of $2m and the first monthly payment of $85,000 .
Thereafter the monthly payments were regularly made by Dubal to Richco, and within a few days, by Richco to Valo, up to March 1988 .
\tIn February 1988 Dubal made its first payment to Richco of the 2.5% commission on sales, in the amount of $2,077,467.40 .
Within 9 days Richco had paid on to JMS at the Fidelity Bank, London, the amount of $1,412,677.83, which I calculate to be 68% of the sum received by Richco .
Another two weeks later, on 1 March 1988, a further $249,590.64, ie a further 12%, was paid (nominally to JMS) to an account at Banque Gutzwiller, Geneva .
That is now known to be the nominated account of Mr Saad Salaam .
That was the first payment made to his account .
12% of 100% represents 15% of 80%, Mr Saad Salaam\'s cut .
Thus a total of 80% of the 2.5% commission received by Richco was paid on in these two payments .
In Richco\'s records this 80% was not subdivided between 50% of the 2.5% commission and the balance made up of the $5s and $2s .
This to my mind supports my reading of the JMS/Valo agreements as stipulating, in one form or another, for the onward payment of up to 80% of the 2.5% .
\tIn March 1988 the monthly payment of $85,000 was originally passed on by Richco to Valo, but within a week that payment had been reversed, and on 31 March 1988 the $85,000 was paid by Richco to Nillet instead .
This helps to date the emergence of the Nillet and Wid agreements and the second versions of the JMS and Valo agreements to March 1988 .
Thereafter the monthly payments of $85,000 were regularly paid on to Nillet within a few days of their receipt by Richco .
\tOn 24 March 1988 two payments were made by Richco in respect of the $5s: one of $205,416.70 to JMS and the other of $36,250 to Mr Saad Salaam\'s account .
Again, Mr Saad Salaam received 15% of the total amount paid out by Richco .
At the time of those two payments Richco had not received any corresponding payment from Dubal .
On 22 April 1988, however, Richco received $1,563,489.80 from Dubal by way of the 2.5% commission; and on 25/27 April Richco made four payments, two each to JMS and to Saad Salaam, in respect of the 2.5% commission and the $5s .
The total of the six payments made by Richco, ie the two March payments and the four April payments, amounted to $1,144,244.95, or some 73% of the $1,563,489.80 received by Richco .
The March payments are therefore another example of Richco making a payment in advance of a corresponding receipt .
The 2.5% commission payments to JMS and Saad Salaam are on this occasion exactly 50% of the 2.5% commission payment received by Richco .
I do not know for sure why the onward payments totalled only an additional 23% or so, rather than the 30% contemplated, but I presume it is related to the fact that on this occasion on-payments were only made in respect of the $5s, and not in respect of the $2s .
Thus Mr Horat\'s schedule only identifies payments in respect of the $5s; and there is a manuscript note of this period in Mr Horat\'s handwriting, saying "$2.-  Not to be paid until end of year" .
\tThere is a fax dated 21 April 1988 in Mr Livingstone\'s handwriting, sent to Mr Salaam, relating to the April payments totalling $1,144,240 .
The fax shows that $1,144,240 figure broken down into four subsidiary figures of $171,636, $389,042, $291,781 and $291,781 .
A calculator shows that these subsidiary figures are respectively 15%, 34%, 25.5% and 25.5% of the first figure, and that the sub-total of the last three figures ($972,604, also recorded on the fax) sub-divides into 40%, 30% and 30% of that sub-total .
Mr Livingstone confirmed these calculations in his evidence and said that they represented the division of the total Richco on-payment between Saad Salaam (15%), Mr Al Tajir (34%, or 40% of the remainder after Saad Salaam\'s share), Mr Salaam and himself (25.5% each, or 30% of the remainder after Saad\'s share) .
The figures in Mr Livingstone\'s fax, and their attribution between Saad Salaam and the rest, are reflected in the payments to JMS and Saad Salaam recorded in Mr Horat\'s schedule .
The tripartite shares in the amounts paid by Richco to JMS were presumably the subject of further on-payments by JMS to the ultimate beneficiaries, Mr Al Tajir, Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone: I revert to this below .
\tOn 29 July 1988 Richco received $1,834,700.90 by way of 2.5% commission, and on various days between 4 and 18 August made onward payments totalling $1,252,395.50, or a little over 68% of the amount received .
Again the onward payments in respect of the 2.5% commission amounted to exactly 50% of the 2.5% commission payment received by Richco .
Again, the additional 18% or so transferred in respect of the $5s (nothing in respect of the $2s) fell short of the 30% maximum contemplated .
\tOn this occasion, in August 1988, the first direct payment to Al Tajir Ltd is found, to an account at the Republican National Bank, New York .
According to Mr Al Tajir\'s evidence, he knew nothing about this .
According to the evidence of Mr Livingstone, however, the payment to Al Tajir Ltd was arranged at Mr Al Tajir\'s request, because Mr Al Tajir had found out that Mr Saad Salaam was receiving his share directly from Richco into his own account, and Mr Al Tajir wanted similar treatment rather than to receive his share via JMS .
I accept Mr Livingstone\'s evidence as to this, including his evidence that Mr Al Tajir paid a fair degree of attention to his receipts from the scheme: see below .
\tOn 31 October 1988 Dubal paid Richco $1,895,487.80 in respect of the 2.5% commission, and on 14 November Richco paid on a total of $1,427,959.38 to JMS, Saad Salaam and Al Tajir Ltd, a little over 75% of the amount Richco had received .
Again, the amounts on-paid in respect of the 2.5% commission constituted 50% of the amount received by Richco .
The additional 25% is on this occasion recorded in Mr Horat\'s schedule as reflecting both the $5s and the $2s .
Although that 25% is closer to the 30% than previous payments, it is still short of it .
Again, Saad Salaam received 15% of the on-payments, but on this occasion Al Tajir Ltd received 40% (not 34% as before), and JMS received 45% (not 51% as before) .
It would appear, therefore, that Mr Livingstone, presumably prompted by Mr Al Tajir, had revised his instructions to Richco so as to ensure that Saad Salaam\'s 15% came out of only Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Livingstone\'s shares, and not also out of Mr Al Tajir\'s share (see footnote  9  above) .
\tOn 31 January 1989 Richco received $1,914,265.30 from Dubal in respect of the 2.5% commission .
It had already pre-paid $550,000 to JMS on 13 January .
On 10 February Richco paid a further $519,721.06 to Al Tajir Ltd and $194,895.49 to Saad Salaam: in all, including the January payments to JMS, a total of $1,264,616.55, or some 66% of the amount it had received .
The lower percentage appears to reflect the fact that the prepayments to JMS were of provisional figures in the rounded amounts of $400,000 in respect of 2.5% commission and $150,000 in respect of the $5s .
\tOn 10 May 1989 Richco received $1,896,616 from Dubal in respect of the 2.5% commission .
It had again prepaid an apparently provisional total of $550,000 to JMS, on 14 April: JMS\'s account had moved to First City Bank, Houston .
On 16 May it paid a further $529,323.20 to Al Tajir Ltd and $190,996.20 to Saad Salaam: in all a total of $1,270,319.40, or some 67% of what it had received .
\tOn 16 August 1989 Richco received $1,782,404 from Dubal in respect of the 2.5% commission .
For a third time it had prepaid an apparently provisional total of $550,000 to JMS on 18 July .
On 25 August it paid a further $486,480.80 to Al Tajir Ltd and $182,430.30 to Saad Salaam: in all a total of $1,218,911.10, or some 68% of what it had received .
\tOn 11 October 1989 Richco received $2,429,307.10 from Dubal in respect of the 2.5% commission .
On 16 October it paid: to JMS, $546,594.09 in respect of 2.5% commission and $150,109.64 in respect of $5s and $2s; to Al Tajir Ltd, $485,861.41 in respect of 2.5% commission and $133,430.79 in respect of $5s and $2s; and to Saad Salaam, $182,198.03 in respect of 2.5% commission and $50,036.55 in respect of $5s and $2s; a total of $1,548,230.50, or nearly 64% of what it had received .
50% of the 2.5% commission received by Richco was passed on as such; the balance of some 14% was passed on as $5s and $2s .
\tOn 15 December 1989 Richco (Clarendon) paid $1,400,000 to an account number 12.822 in the name of "J Diem" held at Bank fur Handel und Effekten, Zurich .
It is common ground that that was Mr Salaam\'s account, held in the name of his bank manager .
There was no payment from Dubal to Richco in the same or similar amount, either shortly before or shortly after that date .
Mr Horat\'s schedule ascribes the payment to the $5s .
A Richco accountancy schedule dated 18 May 1990 also ascribes it to the $5s .
It appears to be linked in that schedule in some way with a similar payment, also ascribed to the $5s, made by Richco (Clarendon) to Al Tajir Ltd on 23 February 1990: in that case too there appears to be no payment from Dubal to Richco in the same or similar amount either shortly before or after that date .
Mr Livingstone provided some evidence about the first of these payments, under cross-examination by Mr Malek (at day 11, pages 139/144) .
The clue appears to be a manuscript document in Mr Horat\'s handwriting dated 15 December 1989, the date of the payment to Mr Salaam\'s account .
This shows that the $1,400,000 is a prepayment in respect of an estimated quantity of 300,000 tonnes of alumina to be supplied by Clarendon to Dubal in calendar 1990: 300,000 x $5 = $1,500,000, from which $100,000 was discounted for early payment .
That would explain why the year "1990" and "300,000" mt are put beside the $1,400,000 entry in Mr Horat\'s document of 18 May 1990 .
("1991" and "300,000" mt are similarly to be found in that document against the payment of February 1990 to Al Tajir Ltd in the sum of $1,296,944. .
\tMr Livingstone was also questioned in this context about documents showing that he and Mr Salaam were in account with one another regarding an investment in the Fidelity Bank Building, Philadelphia, which Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir had originally bought in partnership together .
It looks as though Mr Salaam had proposed to Mr Livingstone that he should invest in that property his proceeds from the scheme (and/or his share in the additional $55 payments) .
One item in this account, an item dated 18 December 1989, is the transfer by Mr Livingstone to Mr Salaam of the sum of $1,400,000 .
It is not clear if this is the same sum as was transferred by Richco (Clarendon) to Mr Salaam at Bank fur Handel (the identity of the amount and the closeness of the dates are intriguing), or whether it is a different sum of $1,400,000 .
If it is the same sum, then it would seem that this $1,400,000, although apparently paid to Mr Salaam, was actually for the benefit of Mr Livingstone .
As it was, Mr Livingstone never saw any return from his investment in the property .
\tThis item of $1,400,000 remains a puzzle, for additional reasons .
Even if it was an advance on the $5s for 1990, it ought to have been shared between Mr Salaam, Mr Saad Salaam, Mr Al Tajir and Mr Livingstone: but in that case, 15% should have gone directly to Saad, 40% to Al Tajir Ltd, and the balance shared between Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone .
As it was, it was not dealt with in this way; nor was the JMS portion sent in the usual way to JMS\'s account (now) with First City Bank, Houston .
Similarly, it is not easy to see why Al Tajir Ltd alone receives a payment in February 1990 by way of an advance in respect of 1991\'s $5s .
It remains to be seen how the $5s were dealt with in 1990/1 .
For the moment, I note these apparently anomalous payments of December 1989 and February 1990, without any clear view as to their true nature .
\tOn 22 January 1990 Richco received $2,157,931 from Dubal in respect of the 2.5% commission .
On 29 January Richco paid out the following amounts: to JMS, $659,714.02; to Al Tajir Ltd, $589,412.47; and to Saad Salaam, $219,904.68; a total of $1,469,031.17 or some 68% of what Richco had received .
Again, the sum transferred on by Richco in respect of 2.5% commission was exactly 50% of what it had received, and the balance of some 18% was in respect of $5s and $2s .
\tOn 18 April 1990 Richco received a further $1,696,806 from Dubal in respect of the 2.5% commission .
On this occasion Mr Horat\'s schedule shows Richco as paying out on 20 April a total of only $765,324 in respect of 2.5% commission, less than 50% (about 45%) of the amount received .
I do not know why that is .
In addition a total of $375,000 was paid on in respect of $5s, but not until 12 June 1990 .
Taking all those payments by Richco together provides the passing on of just over 67% of the amount received by Richco .
\tOn 25 July 1990 Richco received from Dubal $1,638,986 in respect of 2.5% commission .
On 30 July, it passed on: $527,062.42 to JMS, $468,499.93 to Al Tajir Ltd, and $175,687.47 to Saad Salaam, a total of $1,171,249.82, or over 71% of what it had received .
Once again, the sum passed on under the heading of 2.5% commission was less than 50% of what Richco had received, viz $736,249.82 or just under 45%: I do not know why .
\tOn 15 October 1990 Richco received from Dubal $1,709,562 in respect of 2.5% commission .
On 5 November it paid on a total of $1,229,781, or some 72% of what it had received .
50% of what it received was passed on as 2.5% commission .
On this occasion, for the first time, the normal payment to JMS in respect of the 2.5% commission was split, 50/50, between payments to JMS and to Utary Establishment, of which it is common ground that Mr Livingstone was the personal beneficiary .
Mr Livingstone had previously received his share of the $55 payments directly into Utary, starting with a payment of 18 April 1989 .
It would seem, however, that prior to 5 November 1990, Mr Livingstone had received his share of the proceeds of the scheme either via JMS or simply as credit items to the running account which he maintained with Mr Salaam in respect of his investment in the Fidelity Bank Building .
His share of the $5s and $2s continued to be paid directly to JMS, as did his half share in the monthly sums of $85,000 being paid to Nillet .
His account with Mr Salaam shows that at least from July 1988 he was credited with half of such monthly payments .
\tOn 14 January 1991 Richco received $1,954,279 from Dubal in respect of 2.5% commission .
On 23 January Richco made payments totalling $1,412,139.50, or over 72% of what it had received, to JMS, Al Tajir Ltd, Saad Salaam, and Utary .
50% of what Richco received was passed on under the category of 2.5% commission .
On this occasion Utary (Mr Livingstone) received direct payment not only in respect of his share of the 2.5% commission, but also in respect of his share of the $5s and $2s .
\tIn March/April 1991 Richco made prepayments of the discounted capitalised values of the outstanding rights of JMS and Nillet under their agreements .
The Valo agreement had already expired in 1988, and the Wid agreement had not yet come into force: there was no capitalised buy-out of that agreement .
Capitalised payments were also made in respect of the $10s, but not of the $55s .
Mr Livingstone says that the idea for these arrangements was his: he had no wish to continue dealing with "other people\'s cashflow problems" .
He therefore discussed the matter with Mr Al Tajir, obtained agreement in principle from Mr Strothotte, negotiated the payments, and obtained final agreement from the various beneficiaries .
Mr Salaam said that he was pleased to have the cash, but concerned that he was being edged out by his partners .
Mr Strothotte recalled Mr Livingstone presenting the request for capitalised payments as originating from Mr Al Tajir .
Certainly it was Mr Al Tajir who benefitted most from these payments .
Mr Al Tajir\'s evidence of course was that he had no knowledge of these arrangements or payments at all, even though he received a total of $11,442,433 (including payments in respect of the $10s) from them .
In my judgement it is likely that, as Mr Livingstone gave Mr Strothotte to understand, the impetus came from Mr Al Tajir .
The capitalised payments were as follows:  \t(1) In respect of the 2.5% commission: \t\t$6,187,200 to Al Tajir Ltd (Mr Al Tajir)  \t\t$3,480,301 to JMS (Mr Salaam) \t\t$3,480,301 to Utary (Mr Livingstone) \t\t$2,320,203 to Saad Salaam .
\t(2) In respect of the $5s: \t\t$2,312,733 to Al Tajir Ltd (Mr Al Tajir) \t\t$1,623,789 to Mr Salaam (at Bank fur Handel) \t\t$762,789 to Utary (Mr Livingstone) \t\t$1,082,525 to Saad Salaam \t(3) In respect of the monthly payments of $85,000: \t\t$1,501,213 to Mr Salaam (at Bank fur Handel) \t\t$1,574,771 to Utary (Mr Livingstone) .
[15] The payments in respect of the 2.5% commission reflected the established share of 40% for Mr Al Tajir, 22.5% each for Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, and 15% for Saad Salaam .
\tThe payments in respect of the $5s reflected 40% for Mr Al Tajir, some 28% for Mr Salaam, some 13% for Mr Livingstone, and nearly 19% for Saad Salaam .
I do not know why there were these divergences from the normal shares between the four beneficiaries .
Similarly, I do not know why the payments to Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone in respect of the monthly payments of $85,000 were not in identical amounts .
The total of these capitalised payments was $24,325,825 .
\tFollowing these capitalised payments, the only further payments made by Richco were in respect of the $55s .
However, Richco continued to receive monthly payments of $85,000 and quarterly payments in respect of the 2.5% commission: in April 1991 of $2,222,562, in July 1991 of $2,433,877, in October 1991 of $2,461,713, in January 1992 of $2,353,939, in April 1992 of $1,969,541, in July 1992 of $2,082,182, in November 1992 of $2,181,800, and finally in February 1993 of $2,250,589 .
Thus, after the capitalised payments had been made Richco continued to receive a total of 23 payments of $85,000 each, or $1,955,000, and a total of 8 further commission payments amounting to $17,956,203, a grand total of $19,911,203 .
\tA summary of these receipts and payments is as follows: (1) Richco received in all $50,117,622 from Dubal under the Richco consultancy agreement: of which $30,206,419 was received before the capitalised buy-out, and $19,911,203 was received after that time .
(In addition there were further disbursements in respect of the $55s and $10s which are not the subject matter of claim. .
(2) Richco disbursed $49,780,944 under the subsidiary agreements: of which $25,455,119 was paid out prior to the capitalised payments, and $24,325,825 was paid out as part of that arrangement .
(3) The straightforward balance between what Richco received and what it paid out under the scheme is therefore $336,678 .
However, that figure disguises the fact that it paid out some $24 million as capitalised payments in advance of receipt .
In time value terms, therefore, it paid out more than it received .
Its anticipated further receipts were cut short by Dubal\'s termination of the Richco consultancy agreement on 22 March 1993 .
(4) Mr Steven Neal, a chartered accountant and partner in the firm of Kingston Smith, instructed on behalf of Mr Salaam to analyse the payments and receipts, sought to emphasise in his report that Richco had (by and large) retained 50% of the 2.5% commission: a figure he calculates at $20,630,312.41, approximately half of the total receipts by Richco of 2.5% commission in the sum of $42,507,505.26 .
However, in my judgment that is to ignore two matters .
First, the effective structure of the scheme, which, as I have sought to show, used the funds generated by the 2.5% commission to feed not only the onward transmission of half of that commission but also the payment of the $5s and $2s up to a further 30% of that commission .
And secondly, the fact that the capitalised payments, although temporally financed (at the beneficiaries\' cost) by Richco, were secured on and ultimately, in practice and effect, derived from the continuing payments under the Richco primary agreement, at any rate until its early termination .
(5) Mr Salaam received $21,846,288.33 pursuant to the scheme, either personally, or through his companies, JMS, Valo and Nillet .
The figure is made up as follows:  \t(a)\tValo (the mobilisation fee of $2m and six monthly payments of $85,000): \t  \t$2,510,000 \t(b)\tNillet (35 monthly payments of $85,000):            \t$2,975,000  [16] \t(c)\tJMS (the payments in respect of 2.5% commission and the $5s and $2s, made to JMS\'s account at Fidelity Bank, London and latterly First City Bank, Houston):      \t\t$8,270,985.33  [17] \t(d)\tMr Salaam personally (the payments made into his account at Bank fur Handel):          \t$8,090,303 \t(e)\tMr Salaam personally or through his companies (items (a), (b), (c) and (d) above):            \t$21,846,488.39  [18] (6) Mr Saad Salaam received (at Banque Gutzwiller) the total sum of $6,001,861.28 .
(7) Mr Livingstone received (at Utary) the sum of (at least) $6,327,918.09 .
This was the figure adopted by Dubal, accepted  Mr Livingstone, and not disputed by Mr Salaam or the other parties .
It is the figure to be found in my Unreasoned Findings .
For the purposes of Dubal\'s claim, it is good enough, and it binds Dubal .
It is possible, however, or even likely, that prior to November 1990 Mr Livingstone received additional sums under the scheme, indirectly from Dubal, through JMS .
It would follow in such a case that Mr Salaam retained less than he received, but, if so, Mr Salaam did not rely on this point in relation to Mr Livingstone, as distinct from the position vis-a-vis Mr Al Tajir .
(8) Similarly, Mr Al Tajir received (through Al Tajir Ltd) the sum of (at least) $15,604,877.10 .
As far as it went, this was a figure accepted or not disputed by all parties, save for Mr Tajir himself .
[19]   It is again the figure to be found in my Unreasoned Findings .
However, at the contribution proceedings, it was argued that Mr Al Tajir had received additional sums prior to August 1988, via Mr Salaam or his companies .
If that was so, it would mean that Mr Salaam retained less than he received .
I shall revert to this question below .
(9) The two sums of $1,400,000 and $1,296,944, paid in respect of the $5s in the former case to Mr Salaam (at Bank fur Handel) in December 1989 and in the latter to Al Tajir Ltd in February 1990, are included in the above figures as receipts of Mr Salaam and of Mr Al Tajir respectively .
The investigation of the $1,400,000 payment might suggest that that is to be regarded as for the benefit of Mr Livingstone rather than Mr Salaam .
If so, that might also affect the ultimate amount retained by Mr Salaam, but it was not relied upon by Mr Salaam as doing so .
In any event, these payments remain something of a mystery .
There was no investigation before me as to how they are to be taken into account in the overall scheme of things .
I have however conducted, of my own initiative, the following experiments with the figures at my disposal .
I have calculated that up to the time of the capitalised payments made in March 1991, Richco received $24,636,419 in respect of 2.5% commission and paid out a total of $19,885,119 in respect of 2.5% commission and the $5s and $2s (including the payments of $1,400,000 and $1,296,944) or (if those two payments are excluded) $17,188,175 .
The latter pay-out total is nearly 70% of the corresponding sum received, and the former pay-out total rises to just over 80% of that sum received .
Unchecked by other hands, those figures are, of course liable to error .
There may also have been some cross-over in the calculations of the capitalised payments, rendering a strict "before and after" March 1991 approach faulty .
It may be, nevertheless, that these two otherwise mysterious payments are part of the overall calculation of the parties to the scheme which brings the pay-out close to the 80% contemplated .
Whether that be deliberate or not, it would appear that Richco did pay out, up to the time of the capitalised payments in March 1991, approximately 80% of what it received by way of 2.5% commission, as well as all of what it received by way of the mobilisation fee of $2m and the monthly payments of $85,000 .
The Law \tThere was little dispute before me as to the law, save as to whether the test of dishonesty is objective or subjective .
It was, for instance, common ground that where an issue of dishonesty is concerned, the burden of proof is a heavy one: Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd [1957] 1 QB 247 .
\tThere are two main types of accessory liability where a breach of trust or fiduciary duty is concerned .
They are commonly referred to as "knowing receipt" and "knowing assistance" .
As to the former, a third party will be liable as a constructive trustee if he is the recipient beneficially of trust property or of assets representing that property, in the knowledge that the property of which he is in receipt is traceable to a breach of trust or fiduciary relationship: see Agip (Africa) Ltd v. Jackson [1990] 1 Ch 265 (Millett J),  [1991] Ch 547  (CA), El Ajou v. Dollar Land Holdings  [1994] 2 All E R 685  .
It does not matter that he no longer retains the property in question, for he remains liable personally to compensate the claimant for the loss caused by the breach of trust .
Under this heading questions might arise, for instance, as to whether the property received represented trust property; as to what might constitute the requisite "knowledge", and in particular whether some kind of dishonest knowledge was necessary, or whether constructive knowledge sufficed; and as to whether the property received was received beneficially or not .
\tAs to "knowing assistance", the essence of this type of accessory liability is the dishonest assistance in or procurement of a breach of trust or fiduciary relationship .
As Lord Nicholls said in Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v. Tan  [1995] 2 AC 378  (PC) at 382E: "Liability as an accessory is not dependent upon receipt of trust property .
It arises even though no trust property has reached the hands of the accessory. .
One essential issue in such a case, as it was in Tan, is what kind of knowledge is required to render such an accessory liable .
Is dishonest knowledge required, and if so is the test of dishonesty more or less subjective, or objective .
As to this issue, Lord Nicholls pointed out that the jumping-off point had been Lord Selborne LC\'s famous dictum in Barnes v. Addy (1874) LR 9 Ch App 244 at 251/2 that - "...strangers are not to be made constructive trustees...unless they assist with knowledge in a dishonest and fraudulent design on the part of the trustees. .
His conclusion was stated thus (at 392F/G): "Drawing the threads together, their Lordships\' overall conclusion is that dishonesty is a necessary ingredient of accessory liability .
It is also a sufficient ingredient .
A liability in equity to make good resulting loss attaches to a person who dishonestly procures or assists in a breach of trust or fiduciary obligation .
It is not necessary that, in addition, the trustee or fiduciary was acting dishonestly, although this will usually be so where the third party who is assisting him is acting dishonestly .
"Knowingly" is better avoided as a defining ingredient of the principle, and in the context of this principle the  Baden  [1993] 1 W.L.R .
509 scale of knowledge is best forgotten. .
\tAs for the test of dishonesty, Lord Nicholls had said that the standard was objective, "simply not acting as an honest person would in the circumstances" (at 389C) .
The relevant passage of his judgment reads as follows (at 389C/G): \t"Whatever may be the position in some criminal or other contexts (see, for instance,  Reg .
v. Ghosh   [1982] QB 1053 ), in the context of the accessory liability principle acting dishonestly, or with a lack of probity, which is synonymous, means simply not acting as a honest person would in the circumstances .
This is an objective standard .
At first sight this may seem surprising .
Honesty has a connotation of subjectivity, as distinct from the objectivity of negligence .
Honesty, indeed, does have a strong subjective element in that it is a description of a type of conduct assessed in the light of what a person actually knew at the time, as distinct from what a reasonable person would have known or appreciated .
Further, honesty and its counterpart dishonesty are most concerned with advertent conduct, not inadvertent conduct .
Carelessness is not dishonesty .
Thus for the most part dishonesty is to be equated with conscious impropriety .
However, these subjective characteristics of honesty do not mean that individuals are free to set their ow standards of honesty in particular circumstances .
The standard of what constitutes honest conduct is not subjective .
Honesty is not an optional scale, with higher or lower values according to the moral standards of each individual .
If a person knowingly appropriates another\'s property, he will not escape a finding of dishonesty simply because he sees nothing wrong in such behaviour .
"In most situations there is little difficulty in identifying how an honest person would behave .
Honest people do not intentionally deceive others to their detriment .
Honest people do not knowingly take others\' property .
Unless there is a very good and compelling reason, an honest person does not participate in a transaction if he knows it involves a misapplication of trust assets to the detriment of the beneficiaries .
Not does an honest person in such a case deliberately close his eyes and ears, or deliberately not ask questions, lest he learn something he would rather not know, and then proceed regardless. .
Lord Nicholls further exemplified the test in the following passage at 390F/G: "The only answer to these questions lies in keeping in mind that honesty is an objective standard .
The individual is expected to attain the standard which would be observed by a honest person placed in those circumstances .
It is impossible to be more specific .
Knox J. captured the flavour of this, in a case within a commercial setting, when he referred to a person who is "guilty of commercially unacceptable conduct in the particular context involved:" see  Cowan de Groot Properties Ltd. v. Eagle Trust Plc .
[1992] 4 All E.R .
700, 761. .
\tNevertheless, it was submitted by Mr Davis on behalf of the Salaam defendants that Lord Nicholls was mistaken, and that their Lordships\' advice in the Privy Council in Tan could not be reconciled with binding authority in the court of appeal in cases such as Belmont Finance Corporation Ltd v. Williams Furniture Ltd [1979] Ch 250, eg at 267G, where Buckley LJ said: "[Lord Selborne LC\'s] formulation has stood for more than 100 years .
To depart from it now would, I think, introduce an undesirable degree of uncertainty to the law, because if dishonesty is not to be the criterion, what degree of unethical conduct is to be sufficient .
I think we should adhere to the formula used by Lord Selborne L.C .
So in my judgment the design must be shown to be a dishonest one - that is to say, a fraudulent one. .
In that case, however, the issue was whether there had to be any pleaded allegation of dishonesty on the part of the defendants: the issue was not as to the nature of the test of dishonesty, although the court was happy to adopt Lord Selborne\'s reference to a "dishonest and fraudulent design" and to say that no distinction was to be drawn between those epithets .
In Tan the privy council reviewed all lines of earlier authority, and preferred the test of dishonesty to other fault-based principles, relying in this connection on the Belmont case itself (at 388B/E): but that still left open for further refinement the question of the test of dishonesty itself .
In my judgment, I should regard Tan as laying down the modern test .
\tIt was submitted nevertheless that in applying the Tan test I should have regard to the custom and practice of business and public affairs in Dubai .
In Arab Monetary Fund v. Hashim (unreported, 29 July 1994) Chadwick J (at 45/6 of the transcript) said this: \t"The second requirement, as it seems to me, was that the English Court must have satisfied itself that there was no rule of law of any relevant foreign law which - in the words of Lord Pearson in Boys v. Chaplin (supra, [1971] AC 356, 397) - would provide a defence to the AMF\'s cause of action; or - as it might, perhaps, be put in the context of a Barnes v. Addy constructive trust claim - would make it inequitable to hold that an FNBC defendant should be treated as if it were a trustee .
If, as the authorities show, the basis of such a claim is dishonesty or lack of probity on the part of the defendant, then it must be right to judge honesty or dishonesty in the light of all relevant circumstances; and those circumstances must include relevant provisions of the local law .
"It follows that the appropriate course, in the present case, is to examine the evidence as to Swiss law not for the purpose of identifying any rule of that law which the English court would have been concerned to enforce, but rather for the purpose of deciding whether, having regard to the legal framework within which the FNBC and its affiliates were conducting the operation of the numbered accounts at its Geneva branch, there was such dishonesty or lack of probity as would have made it equitable for the English court to treat those defendants as if they were trustees. .
\tIn the present case no evidence of Dubai law is relied on: the most that is put before me is evidence of custom and practice in Dubai, in the form of passages from a report from Mr Khaled El Fadl .
The report was procured on behalf of the Amhurst defendants, but not ultimately relied on by them .
Mr Salaam then sought by way of a Civil Evidence Act notice to rely on specified passages from the report .
The notice was accepted by Dubal, subject to comment .
I have not therefore heard Mr El Fadl cross-examined .
I will refer to what he has to say below .
For the moment I merely comment I would accept that Dubai custom and practice may be in theory relevant, in the sense spoken to by Chadwick J in the citation above, to the overall question which I have to decide, as a matter of English law, as to the honesty or otherwise of the parties before me .
However, it seems to me to be capable of having little, if any, bearing on the acts of the parties before me carried on outside Dubai, as for the most part they were .
\tI revert to the principle of knowing receipt .
In the light of Tan the question arises whether the mental element of "knowing" is to have the same content in knowing receipt as in what should now be called "dishonest assistance" .
Indeed Cowan de Groot Properties v. Eagle Trust, which Lord Nicholls had quoted in the passage cited above, was a case of knowing receipt .
Knox J\'s test, approved by Lord Nicholls, of "commercially disreputable conduct in the particular context involved" comes, in fact, from the obiter part of the former\'s judgment, in case he was wrong to say, as he preferred, that constructive knowledge would not suffice to render a defendant liable in knowing receipt .
It seems to me that in the circumstances, the test in knowing receipt and dishonest assistance is likely to be the same .
\tIn the present case, the focus was in any event on dishonest assistance rather than knowing receipt .
This was first because, subject to the question of dishonesty, there was no issue as to whether Mr Salaam had assisted in the scheme; secondly, because the claim in dishonest assistance was the larger claim, and embraced all Dubal\'s payments to Richco; and thirdly, because no submissions were made to the effect that Mr Salaam\'s or his companies\' receipts were not received beneficially  [20]  - otherwise than in the case of the payments to Saad Salaam, and those in any event appear to have been paid directly to the latter\'s personal account, even if under the name of JMS .
Thus it was accepted that Mr Salaam had received $21,846,488.39 (paragraphs 5/6 of Mr Davis\'s closing submissions on behalf of the Salaam defendants) .
In the circumstances, very little attention was paid to any separate issues which might otherwise have arisen under the heading of knowing receipt .
I have already said that in the light of Tan I would regard the test of the mental element involved as being dishonesty in the Tan sense .
As for beneficial receipt, the matter was dealt with by the concession I have just referred to: and that concession remained, even though in other parts of Mr Davis\' submissions, for instance in dealing with the quantum of Mr Al Tajir\'s receipts (in anticipation of an issue in the contribution proceedings) it was submitted that Mr Al Tajir had received his agreed share from Mr Salaam prior to the commencement of direct payments in August 1988 .
As for whether the receipts in question at least represented trust property, that issue too at the end of the day was not taken by Mr Salaam .
In any event I have expressed the view that they did, even in the case of the capitalised prepayments .
\tUltimately, therefore, the only issue of law I had to decide in respect of the main action was as to the appropriate test of dishonesty: and I have decided that by adopting the test in Tan .
As it is, Dubal made it clear that, while it only had to meet the test in Tan, what it alleged against Mr Salaam was actual dishonesty, the subjective knowledge that what he was participating in was dishonest "theft" .
\tStrictly speaking, the only person whose honesty was formally in question for the purpose of the main action, following the Amhurst settlement, was Mr Salaam .
However, his position could not realistically be considered separately from those of Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir .
Mr Livingstone\'s position had to be considered, also because it was a condition precedent of any liability in the main action that Mr Livingstone had acted in breach of his fiduciary obligations .
Tan makes clear that a fiduciary may well be in breach without being himself dishonest: but for the purposes of the contribution proceedings the question of Mr Livingstone\'s honesty was itself in issue .
For similar reasons Richco\'s honesty was in issue .
The Amhurst defendants\' honesty was no longer in issue after their settlement with Dubal: instead I had to proceed in their case on the assumption that what Dubal had factually pleaded against them was true .
In effect therefore, I shall have to consider the parties\' honesty or otherwise all of a piece .
I must start, however, with Mr Livingstone: was he in breach of a fiduciary obligation .
and if so, had he been dishonest .
Before turning to those questions, however, I must say something more about Dubai custom and practice .
Dubai practice and custom  \tIt has been submitted on behalf of Mr Salaam that the issue of dishonesty should be judged in the light of Dubai custom and practice and in this connection he relies on the evidence of Mr Khaled El Fadl .
Mr El Fadl was born in Kuwait and is now an American citizen and member of the Pennsylvania and New Jersey bars .
He is also a member of the Committee on Islamic and International Law of the American Branch of the International Law Association, an adjunct Professor of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law at the University of Texas, and a consultant to the law firm of Medhat Abou El Fadl in Cairo .
\tIt is not clear to me exactly how Mr Salaam relies on the evidence of Mr El Fadl .
His report is not cited in Mr Davis\'s Outline Closing Submissions under the heading of "Accepted Custom and Practice" .
Instead, reliance is there placed on passages from the evidence of Mr Livingstone, Mr Salaam, Mr Strothotte and Mr Briggs to the effect that commissions were part of the accepted culture of Dubai .
That, however, was on the premise that such commissions were authorised, for instance by a foreign company in favour of its Dubai sponsor or by the ruling family in the case of companies within its control .
Similarly a large part of Mr El Fadl\'s report is concerned with the position of the Ruler\'s representative .
I have found, however, that Mr Al Tajir was not the Ruler\'s representative and was not acting as such in the context of the scheme .
\tMr El Fadl opines at one point that a belief by Mr Salaam that Mr Al Tajir was closely associated with the Ruler and was his effective representative "would reasonably have been held" as long as Sheikh Rashid was alive .
He develops that thought to a certain extent, eg by doubting whether the ruling family itself, until the death of Sheikh Rashid, was clear about Mr Al Tajir\'s authority, or by stating that none of the clear signs of Mr Al Tajir\'s disempowerment had occurred .
I, however, must be the judge of those matters, on all the evidence before me, and I have found that Mr Salaam did not believe that Mr Al Tajir was the Ruler\'s representative, and could not have reasonably done so .
In doing so I have borne in mind what Mr El Fadl has written .
I very much doubt, nevertheless, that Mr El Fadl has any standing, albeit an expert on Dubai law, to seek to express an opinion on the facts of the case in this way .
\tFinally I mention that, under the heading "Commissions - Government Enterprises", Mr El Fadl opines that it is not unusual, in the absence of prohibition by law, for a manager or executive of a government organisation to receive or share in a commission as part of his expected remuneration .
The context of that opinion, however, is that the commission in question has been granted by the Ruler or his representative .
Again, that question does not arise .
\tI therefore find that I am not assisted in this context by Mr El Fadl\'s report .
I would merely add that, if I had received compelling evidence, tested under cross-examination, that payments of the kind and size of the payments in this case were acceptable under Dubai custom and practice even in the absence of the clear consent of the owners of the business concerned, I would have had to consider to what extent such evidence was relevant to transactions for the most part negotiated in Switzerland, evidenced by agreements expressly made subject to  English law, and performed by the making of payments in Switzerland, England and the USA .
As it is, that question does not arise .
Mr Livingstone \tI revert to the questions posed: was Mr Livingstone in breach of a fiduciary obligation .
and if so, had he been dishonest .
There was no dispute that Mr Livingstone was in a fiduciary relationship with Dubal, or that he had participated in the making of the Richco consultancy agreement, the setting up of the scheme, and the receiving of payments under it .
The question was first, whether he was in breach of fiduciary duty, and secondly whether he was dishonest, in so acting .
\tIn my judgment, the fact that he was in breach of his fiduciary duty to Dubal must follow from my rejection of the submission that in acting as he did he was acting with the authority of Mr Al Tajir as a representative of the Ruler of Dubai .
That was ultimately the alleged basis of the legitimacy of the scheme as a whole and his participation in it .
It was not in the end alleged that the scheme - and certainly not the scheme as I have found it to be, with only a small fraction of Dubal\'s total expenditure remaining in Richco\'s hands - was within his ordinary or even extraordinary powers as chief executive of Dubal, or within his powers of attorney .
There was no separate part of the final submissions on behalf of either Mr Salaam or Mr Livingstone that sought to submit that he had acted in accordance with his fiduciary duty, unless he had acted with the authority of Mr Tajir .
Moreover, there was no submission in any event, nor of course could there be, that Mr Livingstone was acting in accordance with his fiduciary duty, unless he was acting honestly .
I regret to say, however, that in my judgment he was acting dishonestly .
I say so for the following reasons .
\tFirst, it was the foundation of his case on honesty that he was acting with Mr Al Tajir\'s authority as the representative of the Ruler of Dubal, or at least believed himself to be .
I have already found that Mr Al Tajir had no such authority at the relevant time .
Nor do I accept that Mr Livingstone believed that Mr Al Tajir had such authority .
Mr Livingstone was the chief executive of Dubal and lived in Dubai .
He must have been aware of Mr Al Tajir\'s resignation from his official position as the Director of the Ruler\'s Affairs, and of his vacation of his old office .
He must have been aware of this all the more because the fall or at least departure of Mr Al Tajir from his previous official, governmental and personal status as the Ruler\'s representative was in my judgment the reason why the GRC management agreement began to unravel: and that was a matter in which Mr Livingstone was intimately involved both as the chief executive of Dubal and by reason of his personal interest in the profits of that agreement .
The very fact that Mr Livingstone has staked so much on his contention and his evidence that Mr Al Tajir still retained his former status, or that he at least believed him to have done so, at any rate in relation to Dubal, means, with my rejection of that contention and evidence, that Mr Livingstone has been shown to have taken up a false position: and that is symptomatic of his lack of honesty in relation to the scheme .
\tThirdly, the fact that Mr Livingstone himself received large payments under the scheme, and that he was one of originally three and then four major beneficiaries of it, is inconsistent with his honesty .
It was his own evidence that he was not entitled to any payment, and that he had not stipulated for any payment: he merely resigned himself to something which he regarded as a form of unofficial, but if pressed he would say deserved, bonus .
It was not, however, a bonus handed out by Dubal, or by the government, or by his chairman Sheikh Hamdan .
It was something which he agreed with Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam, in circumstances where he asserts, but I reject, Mr Al Tajir\'s authority to agree such payment on behalf of Dubal or its owners .
In any event, Mr Livingstone was already very well remunerated, so that his attempt to explain his receipts from the scheme as an unofficial bonus was in my judgment spurious: apart from his more than adequate salary, he had received a $1,131,176 gratuity in 1988 .
\tFourthly, there was the background of his participation in the GRC management agreement .
Even if that agreement began its life in the era of Mr Al Tajir\'s ascendancy, it came to an end after he had resigned his official position as the Ruler\'s representative, and in my judgment those two matters were not unconnected .
I cannot accept that Mr Livingstone was not aware that a new regime had come to power in Dubai, that that was reflected in a change in the power structure in Dubal, and that the creaming off of Dubal\'s funds by means of the GRC agreement was unacceptable in the new climate .
As Mr Livingstone was at times candid enough to admit, the GRC agreement was "a means of abstracting cash from Dubal", and involved the theft of money from Dubal ("If you wish to put it that way") .
In my judgment, the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements were structured as they were, with Mr Livingstone\'s dishonest complicity, in order to disguise the fact that this scheme was but a further and more refined device for abstracting Dubal\'s money: for on this occasion the abstraction was to operate under the cloak of an apparently arms-length agreement with an independent partner in the form of Richco .
Under the Richco scheme, no one at Dubal, except for Mr Livingstone himself, was supposed to know that most of the funds paid out by Dubal to Richco was to end up in the hands of Mr Livingstone and the other beneficiaries of the scheme .
\tFifthly, there is the fact that in his cross-examination, as I have sought to describe it above, Mr Livingstone at times accepted, both implicitly and even expressly, the essential dishonesty of the Richco scheme .
At best, his oral evidence on this subject relied on the fig-leaf of Mr Al Tajir\'s authority: without that protection, however, he was compelled to recognise the scheme for what it was .
\tSixthly, the invidious and entirely false position that Mr Livingstone found himself to be in, as "paymaster, as it were", can be illustrated by the occasions when he was left to organise what he himself accepted were totally bogus transactions, such as the September 1988 option for $3,000,000 and the December 1988 option for $2,600,000 .
\tSeventhly, the dishonesty of his situation can also be pointed up by his unsatisfactory evidence regarding his relations with his chairman, Sheikh Hamdan, in connection with the Richco scheme .
In his statement he said that  "I believe that I informed Sheikh Hamdan about the Richco Consultancy Agreement because it was not in the usual course of Dubal\'s business .
I believe that I said something to him like "We are going to enter into a consultancy agreement with the world\'s leading aluminium and alumina traders..." In my judgment, the element of uncertainty reflected in the language "I believe..." is inappropriate to the importance of this evidence .
Mr Livingstone here accepts that the Richco arrangement was not in the usual course of business and therefore something which he ought to mention to his chairman .
It was indeed; and I regard it as inconceivable that if he had mentioned it to Sheikh Hamdan in any suitable manner he would not have remembered the occasion well .
In any event, to mention the arrangement without at the same time explaining to Sheikh Hamdan what was really unusual about it, namely that up to 80% of the monies payable under it were to flow through to Mr Salaam\'s companies and through them to Mr Al Tajir and to Mr Livingstone himself, as well as to Mr Salaam, would have been to present a wholly disingenuous account of the scheme .
I conclude that Mr Livingstone did not make any presentation, and certainly no adequate presentation, of the scheme to Sheikh Hamdan .
That is what Sheikh Hamdan says in his own statement, and I accept his evidence, conscious as I am that he has not been cross-examined upon it .
Mr Livingstone\'s failure to present the matter properly to his chairman, especially against the background of the GRC management agreement and its termination, is of course consistent only with Mr Livingstone\'s recognition to himself of the dishonesty of the scheme .
\tEighthly, there is the fact that Mr Livingstone has always hitherto been unable or unwilling, or both, to give an account of the scheme which refers its unusual and apparently uncommercial elements to the legitimate authority of Mr Al Tajir .
This was so both when he was first questioned about the Richco consultancy agreement in 1992 before he left Dubal, and when he was sued by Dubal in the Livingstone proceedings .
In my judgment the obvious explanation for his response, or absence of response, is the correct explanation: not only did Mr Al Tajir possess no authority which could legitimise the scheme, but Mr Livingstone knew that the implication of Mr Al Tajir could provide him with no defence, not even with the colour of an excuse .
\tI regret therefore that I must find that Mr Livingstone was a dishonest participant in the scheme .
It follows both from that conclusion and from many of the elements which have gone to support that conclusion that it is almost inevitable that I must find Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Al Tajir\'s participation to have been dishonest as well .
Mr Salaam \tI would express my conclusions about Mr Salaam\'s role as follows .
\tFirst, like Mr Livingstone, he knew that Mr Al Tajir no longer had authority from Dubal or the Ruler to legitimise the scheme .
He knew Mr Al Tajir well: he had been and remained business partners with him in various ventures, and was cooperating with him in the diplomatic missions arising from the Lebanese peace process .
I cannot accept that Mr Al Tajir would have sought to lead Mr Salaam into the belief, or leave him disabused in the belief, that he retained his former role within the government of Dubai or in the affairs of Dubal .
In any event, the unwinding of the GRC management agreement would have taught Mr Salaam the very pertinent truth of Mr Al Tajir\'s waning influence .
If Mr Al Tajir had remained in power, there was no reason why the GRC agreement could not have continued as before .
On top of all that, Sheikh Mohamed had told Mr Salaam to his face in March 1983 that Mr Al Tajir\'s "ways of business are over" .
I have already made the point above that Mr Salaam\'s evidence in relation to that meeting was unsatisfactory .
It follows that Mr Salaam, like Mr Livingstone, has based his case on the false defence that the scheme was authorised by Mr Al Tajir .
The falsity of that defence is in itself strong evidence of dishonesty .
\tSecondly, Mr Salaam likewise knew that Mr Livingstone had no justification for sharing in the spoils of the scheme .
He knew that Mr Livingstone was responsible to Dubal and its owners for its proper management, and that his participation in a scheme for diverting its assets under the guise of a "strategic partnership" with Richco was dishonest .
He knew that Mr Livingstone\'s complicity was indispensable to the scheme .
He knew, for he agreed the division of the spoils, the huge sums which were allotted to Mr Livingstone .
Even if the earning of an unofficial bonus could be regarded as a legitimate part of the mores of Dubai business life, at any rate when authorised by Dubal\'s owners, Mr Salaam knew that the immense sums allotted to Mr Livingstone were not the payment of a bonus, but the price of an indispensable partner in dishonesty .
\tThirdly, I reject Mr Salaam\'s explanations of his own receipts .
He sought in the main to represent them as the payment of an introductory commission: but under the terms of the subsidiary agreements, of course, they constituted the consideration for the provision of ongoing services .
No such services were in fact provided .
I have made the point above that in his evidence Mr Salaam was ambivalent about whether the commission he spoke of was to come from Richco, for the introduction to Dubal, or vice versa .
That ambivalence reflects the unreality of the explanation .
Moreover, if Mr Salaam\'s share of the payments routed through Dubal was the payment of an introductory commission to him, what were the payments to Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir .
Did they all have to be rewarded for the same introduction .
If so, the introductory commission payable by Richco, with Dubal\'s money, amounted to the great majority of the payments to be made by Dubal purportedly in consideration for services to be provided by Richco .
The fact is, as Mr Livingstone accepted but Mr Salaam continued to deny, that the scheme was a device for abstracting money from Dubal, and that Mr Salaam together with Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir divided up the spoils by agreement between themselves .
\tFourthly, the dishonesty of Mr Salaam is confirmed by the form of the agreements .
If the true basis of the scheme had been a strategic partnership, under which Richco was to be properly remunerated for its services and Mr Salaam was to share a commission with his partner, Mr Al Tajir, or was even to earn further sums for the provision of subcontracted services, there was no reason why the agreements could not have been drafted to reflect that situation .
An honest scheme would have clearly marked out the sums due to Richco for what Richco could provide to Dubal, and the sums due to Mr Salaam\'s companies for any real provision by them of subcontracted services, as well as the sums due to Mr Salaam (or his companies) and Mr Al Tajir for any commissions earned by them .
I can conceive that any secret but genuine bonus to be granted to Mr Livingstone would have to be disguised, but that would be a mere detail .
It may be that Mr Livingstone himself played a part in the formulation of the scheme in the way it was ultimately set up: essentially, however, the agreements were the responsibility of Mr Salaam\'s solicitor, Mr Amhurst .
As part of the Amhurst settlement, Dubal has withdrawn all allegations against Mr Amhurst .
The price for that withdrawal, however, was the payment of $10 million by the Amhurst defendants to Dubal .
It is unrealistic to see in that a complete exoneration of Mr Amhurst .
Whatever be his position, however, and even if he is to be regarded as a solicitor merely acting on his client\'s instructions in complete innocence of his client\'s guilty complicity, that merely places the responsibility for the scheme\'s legal form where in any event it must ultimately lie, namely on Mr Salaam, who was Mr Amhurst\'s client .
It was Mr Salaam who went to Zug with Mr Livingstone in May 1987 to negotiate the scheme with Mr Rich .
As Mr Salaam said in his third affirmation (at para 108): "It was my face-to-face negotiations with Marc Rich which eventually led to agreements between Richco and Nillet, LMS, Valo and Wid, which were all Gulf companies" .
In any event, I reject the submission advanced on behalf of Mr Salaam, that because Dubal has withdrawn allegations of impropriety against Mr Amhurst, therefore Mr Salaam must also be wholly innocent .
\tFifthly, I have to make up my mind about Mr Salaam as a witness .
Was he a witness of truth .
There are cases where the circumstances raise a heavy inference of wrongdoing, but a witness redeems himself by his evidence .
In my judgment, however, Mr Salaam was an unsatisfactory witness, and I can place no confidence in his testimony .
He was at times argumentative and evasive, and at times used bluster and arrogance to seek to carry him through .
I did not accept his evidence about Mr Al Tajir as the legitimate source of authority for the scheme .
I did not accept his evidence about the reasons for the structure of the scheme, or as to the legitimacy of the payments of the huge sums to his companies and to Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir .
\tIt was submitted on his behalf that unless I could find that the Richco consultancy agreement was itself a sham, then Dubal\'s claim must fail; and that it was impossible to find it to have been a sham in the light of Mr Strothotte\'s evidence that Richco intended to and did provide real services to Dubal under it .
In my judgment, however, that submission is mistaken .
Whether or not Richco did intend to provide or did provide any services to Dubal under the consultancy agreement (as distinct from the other agreements entered into between Richco and Dubal) seems to me to be ultimately beside the point .
At most, Richco was expected to retain only a small fraction of the 2.5% commission and none of the other fees .
The whole of the balance was paid over under the subsidiary agreements, which were on any view a total sham .
In any event the scheme as a whole was thoroughly dishonest .
Moreover, I would for my part regard the Richco consultancy agreement as itself a sham, even if Richco had been intended to retain its fraction of the monies paid over to it as recompense for any services: for the Richco consultancy agreement cannot be divorced from the scheme as a whole, together with the wholly spurious subsidiary agreements .
As it is, I would in all the circumstances prefer to regard Richco\'s small retention under the scheme as its price for participating in the scheme, rather than as a genuine reward for providing services, of which there is no concrete evidence .
I return to this matter below, under the heading of Richco .
\tIn the circumstances, I regret that I must find Mr Salaam\'s participation in the scheme to have been dishonest as well .
Mr Al Tajir \tMr Al Tajir did not seek to say that he possessed the authority of Dubal or the Ruler to give effect to the scheme .
His evidence was rather that he played a purely facilitative role in bringing Dubal and Richco together, for which he had stipulated a fee by way of commission negotiated directly, and separately, with Marc Rich himself .
He sought to distance himself from Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam, and indeed from the whole transaction .
He said he was unaware until a late date that any payments had been made into his (family) account at all .
\tI bear in mind that Mr Al Tajir had the advantage or disadvantage of not being available to be cross-examined on his written evidence .
I will assume in his favour that that was a disadvantage .
Nevertheless, it seems to me to be impossible to do other than find that Mr Al Tajir participated fully, and therefore dishonestly, with his partners in the scheme, Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam .
My reasons are as follows .
\tFirst, while there is much in the evidence of Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam that I cannot accept, and I do not accept that their participation in the scheme was authorised or believed by them to be authorised by Mr Al Tajir, nevertheless I do not for one moment think that they were making up an entirely fictitious account of Mr Al Tajir\'s full share in the planning and proceeds of the scheme .
Whatever false gloss they sought to place on his role, viz as the legitimising sanction of the whole scheme, they were surely speaking the truth when they gave detailed evidence of his complicity .
\tIt follows that I do not accept that his only role was to facilitate the initial contact with Richco through Marc Rich in return for a personally negotiated and private commission arrangement .
I can believe that the importance of his involvement was to make the initial contact with Mr Rich: but there is no evidence to support his contention that that was the limit of his involvement .
On the contrary, it is clear that he relied on Mr Livingstone and Mr Salaam to promote in negotiations with Richco what were obviously the joint interests of their partnership in the scheme .
He was a party to the lunchtime agreement made at the Mirabelle restaurant for the three-way split of the scheme\'s proceeds, - or at any rate what he thought of as the scheme\'s proceeds, for whether he knew about the mobilisation fee and the monthly payments must be in doubt .
He also played a crucial role in bringing Saad Salaam into the partners\' share-out .
In due course he made use of Mr Livingstone again for the purpose of negotiating new payments to him, the $55s and $10s .
I reject his attempt to distance himself from Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone, and I regard that attempt as proceeding from consciousness of guilt .
\tSecondly, there is the matter of his receipts, the manner of them and his evidence about them .
I accept Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Livingstone\'s evidence that Mr Al Tajir shared in the allocations of the 2.5% commission from the very beginning, even before the insistence of Saad Salaam on being paid by Richco directly rather than through his brother\'s company, JMS, led to Mr Al Tajir expressing a similar preference, with the effect that from August 1988 his share was paid directly to Al Tajir Ltd .
It is true that from that time payments were openly made into that family account: but Mr Al Tajir is not able to claim the benefit of that openness, since he insists that he knew nothing about any payments at all .
As it is, Mr Livingstone gave evidence that Mr Al Tajir paid close attention to his receipts .
The $55s and the $10s were negotiated, said Mr Livingstone, on Mr Al Tajir\'s initiative, and Mr Al Tajir\'s share was similarly paid to Al Tajir Ltd. Mr Livingstone said that, in general, he was "always held responsible by Mr Al Tajir for seeing what happened to the money"; Mr Al Tajir kept no records and relied on Mr Livingstone to assure him that "things were going as he had anticipated" (day 10, pages 25, 28) .
The bogus option for $2.6 million was generated to pay for Mr Al Tajir\'s flying expenses, on his instructions .
I accept that evidence, although I recognise that it comes from a tainted source .
Finally, the capitalised payments made in March/April 1991 resulted in a total of over $11,000,000 being paid to Al Tajir Ltd at that time .
I have concluded above that the impetus for the capitalisation of these revenue streams came from Mr Al Tajir, who was after all the largest beneficiary of them .
However, even if I am wrong to ascribe the impetus to him, it is clear that Mr Livingstone\'s evidence, that the idea of capitalising the payments was at least discussed with Mr Al Tajir and needed his approval, must be correct .
It is also relevant to observe that Mr Al Tajir disclosed no documents in support of his evidence .
In my judgment, Mr Al Tajir\'s evidence that he knew nothing about payments to him pursuant to the scheme is false, and the reason why such false evidence has been proffered is to disguise Mr Al Tajir\'s participation in a dishonest scheme .
\tThirdly, although it is a matter which postdates the trial and my unreasoned findings, Mr Al Tajir has settled with Dubal under the settlement agreement described earlier in this judgment, under which he will pay a total of $18 million in instalments by 31 December 1999 .
That neutralises an argument previously advanced on Mr Al Tajir\'s behalf that it was impossible to infer any dishonesty on Mr Al Tajir\'s part in circumstances where no claim had been brought against him by Dubal .
I have concluded in any event that no safe inference could have been drawn from Dubal\'s failure to sue Mr Al Tajir at that late stage in the preparation for trial when Dubal learned for the first time from Richco\'s discovery that he had been a recipient of funds under the scheme .
That is because it is impossible to be confident that I am in a position to understand the political or tactical considerations which could lie behind Dubal\'s decision .
Mr Al Tajir, although for many years now no longer the Ruler\'s representative, had been very close to the ruling family and to Sheikh Rashid\'s sons; and yet their present relationships with him may not, on the evidence before me, be unanimous .
In any event Mr Al Tajir\'s honesty has always been in issue in the third party proceedings, and Mr Al Tajir has never been under any illusion in this trial about the way in which Dubal has presented its case .
\tI regret therefore to conclude that Mr Al Tajir was also a dishonest participant in the scheme .
Richco \tIt is necessary for the purposes of the third party proceedings to express a conclusion concerning Richco\'s role and honesty .
In my judgment it is impossible to find that Richco was not also dishonestly participating in the scheme .
\tTo start with, Richco was of course privy to the scheme as a whole, for it was a signatory to all the agreements and made the payments under it (albeit Mr Strothotte said that he was unaware of the ultimate beneficiaries of the scheme, other than Mr Al Tajir) .
Richco therefore knew, and Mr Strothotte conceded, that the subsidiary agreements were improper shams .
Richco also knew that all of the monies generated by the Richco consultancy agreement were to be paid on under the sham subsidiary agreements, with the exception, as Mr Temple accepted, of 0.5% out of the 2.5% fee on sales .
Mr Strothotte said that he was aware, or became aware, only that Mr Al Tajir was a beneficiary of those payments, and that he did not know about the other beneficiaries and in particular did not know that Mr Livingstone was one of them .
In my view it would be unrealistic to accept that evidence; but be that as it may, in my view the inference is inescapable that Richco, through Mr Marc Rich himself, must have had a full understanding of the scheme, including the fact that the ultimate beneficiaries were to include Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone as well as Mr Al Tajir .
It was, as I have found, with Mr Rich that Mr Al Tajir first discussed the scheme .
It was again with Mr Rich that Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone had their initial discussions when they visited Zug in May 1987 .
Mr Rich has not given evidence on behalf of Richco: Mr Strothotte says that is because there are disputes between Richco and Mr Rich .
That is a reasonable and likely explanation for the absence of his evidence .
The fact remains that in the absence of his evidence there is nothing to counter the strong inference that he was fully privy to the scheme and its considerations .
After all, Mr Salaam had not been introduced to Richco for the sake of the services which he or his companies were to provide under the sham agreements: it was inescapable therefore that he was to benefit in the payments to be made under the sham agreements .
Mr Strothotte accepted that he was told by Mr Rich that Mr Salaam was an associate of Mr Al Tajir .
Similarly, it seems to me to be entirely unrealistic to suppose that Mr Livingstone, who even on Mr Strothotte\'s evidence had shown such interest in the structure of the scheme and in the making of payments under it, was not also understood to be a beneficiary .
At the very least Richco was reckless as to Mr Livingstone\'s status as a beneficiary, and ought to have been aware of it .
\tMr Strothotte\'s evidence was to some extent ambivalent about whether the scheme was regarded by Richco as one that it could honestly enter into: as essentially redounding to Dubal\'s benefit and in reliance on Mr Al Tajir\'s "political standing", Mr Livingstone\'s executive authority, and Mr Amhurst\'s professional reputation; or whether it was recognised as being flawed by dishonesty in its very conception .
In my judgment, the latter is the true position: it is inherent in the acceptance that the subsidiary agreements were shams, mere "vehicles for payment" .
In this connection Mr Strothotte said nothing to support a case that the payments were legitimate commissions; nor did he ultimately found himself on Mr Al Tajir\'s authority as distinct from Mr Livingstone\'s status as chief executive .
Thus he said (at day 6, pages 11/12): "Q.\tAs far as you were aware, and I am talking about you and Richco, the authority within Dubal to conclude the commercial alliance, you saw that authority, first of all, in Mr Livingstone, as chief executive .
\t"A.\tYes... \t"Q.\tSo the fact is, and this is the point, you never looked to Mr Tajir for authority, you never involved him in the drafting of the agreements, and you never involved him in the discussion of any of its terms .
That is correct, is it not .
\t"A.\tThat is correct. .
It is impossible to my mind, however, to seek in Mr Livingstone\'s executive authority the justification for what are admitted to be sham vehicles for payment on such a scale, and that is so even if Mr Livingstone was not regarded as a beneficiary of such payments, but a fortiori if, as I find, he was or ought to have been so regarded .
\tTo some extent Richco must get credit, even though it was acting under the exigencies of seeking to preserve its commercial relationship with Dubal, for being willing both to accommodate Dubal\'s concerns about the agreements entered into under Mr Livingstone\'s stewardship and to provide information to Dubal to enable it to pursue its claims .
However, it must be accepted that Richco was slow at first to disgorge information regarding the full ramifications of the various payments made under the scheme and ancillary agreements, and in my view that was an implicit recognition of its complicity .
Thus in December 1995 Richco provided answers to questions posed by Dubal, which are recorded in a document which has come to be known as the "Clyde memorandum" .
The information was provided under a general warning that it was based on memory and impressions created some years back and might therefore be in detail inaccurate: but the broad "picture" was believed to be accurate .
Mr Strothotte approved the memorandum .
Nevertheless, in cross-examination he was forced to concede that some of the answers to questions relating to the payment of monies were "grossly misleading" although as he would have it, unintentionally so .
In particular question 16, which asked if any payments were made directly to (inter alios) Mr Salaam, Mr Al Tajir or Mr Livingstone, was answered: "No payments were made directly to: Salaam, Tajir...or Livingstone ( except  Richco was aware that on a couple of occasions requests were made to send to an account which had Tajir\'s name on it but these were relatively minor amounts being from $5,000 to $200,000). .
Mr Strothotte when asked if that was not an outright lie agreed "It appears today to be, yes" but was "not so sure" that it was known at the time, in December 1995, by him to be .
He agreed that he had known at the time of payment that enormous sums had been paid to Al Tajir Ltd, but was not sure that he had carried that in his mind when approving the memorandum .
He explained: "I had not focused on that fact .
I had not focused on particular, whatever the amounts were, and they were important on who the individual companies were and what there was .
I just wanted to step out of this thing when we settled with Dubal and be done with it and turn it over to the lawyers whatever residual activities would result from it .
So in that I may have been negligent to not have been extremely precise. .
\tIn my judgment, however, Mr Strothotte must have recalled (in broad picture at any rate) that Mr Al Tajir (Al Tajir Ltd) had been paid enormous sums .
I therefore cannot accept that he did not appreciate that monies were being paid, even if indirectly, to Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone as well .
\tI regret therefore to find that Richco was also a dishonest participant in the scheme .
The contribution proceedings \tI turn now to the contribution proceedings, and restate their essential structure .
It will be recalled that the Amhurst defendants had for the purpose of the contribution proceedings divided into two separate interests: Mr Amhurst himself, now represented by Mr Leggatt; and ABMN and ABC excluding Mr Amhurst, whom Mr Boswood continued to represent (the "Amhurst partners") .
The Salaam defendants sought contribution from Mr Amhurst, the Amhurst partners and Mr Al Tajir, ie from everyone except Mr Livingstone and (belatedly) Richco  [21]  .
The Amhurst partners sought contribution from Mr Salaam, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir (but not from Richco: it was part of the Amhurst settlement that the Amhurst partners dropped their claim against Richco) .
None of the third parties had originally claimed contribution from anyone; but at the last moment Mr Al Tajir, following my unreasoned findings, amended his third party defence to counterclaim a contribution but solely from Mr Amhurst in the event that the Amhurst partners\' contribution claim against him was successful .
The contribution claims by the Salaam defendants concentrated essentially on Mr Salaam himself, and there was no contribution claim against Nillet and JMS, for it was recognised that they were insolvent .
I shall therefore speak only of Mr Salaam .
Mr Amhurst made no contribution claim, for under the Amhurst settlement he had paid nothing, and the Amhurst partners had alone funded the settlement .
\tThus:  \t-  Mr Salaam  claimed contribution against everyone except Mr Livingstone and Richco, and faced a claim by the Amhurst partners; \t-  the Amhurst partners  claimed contribution from Mr Salaam, Mr Al Tajir and Mr Livingstone, and faced a claim from Mr Salaam; \t-  Mr Amhurst  claimed contribution from no one, and faced a claim from Mr Salaam and a (contingent) claim from Mr Al Tajir; \t-  Mr Al Tajir  claimed (contingently) only from Mr Amhurst, and faced a claim from Mr Salaam and the Amhurst partners; \t-  Mr Livingstone  claimed contribution from no one, and faced a claim only from the Amhurst partners; \t-  Richco  claimed contribution from no one, and (following the settlements) faced a claim from no one .
The Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 (the "Act") \tI set out below what for present purposes are the essential provisions of the Act .
The entitlement to contribution is the subject of section 1, as follows: \t"1(1)  Subject to the following provisions of this section, any person liable in respect of any damage suffered by another person may recover contribution from any other person liable in respect of the same damage (whether jointly with him or otherwise) .
\t"(2)  A person shall be entitled to recover contribution by virtue of subsection (1) above notwithstanding that he has ceased to be liable in respect of the damage in question since the time when the damage occurred, provided that he was so liable immediately before he made or was ordered or agreed to make the payment in respect of which the contribution is sought .
\t"(3)  A person shall be liable to make contribution by virtue of subsection (1) above notwithstanding that he has ceased to be liable in respect of the damage in question since the time when the damage occurred, unless he ceased to be liable by virtue of a period of limitation or prescription which extinguished the right on which the claim against him in respect of the damage was based .
"(4)  A person who has made or agreed to make any payment in bona fide settlement or compromise of any claim made against him in respect of any damage (including a payment into court which has been accepted) shall be entitled to recover contribution in accordance with this section without regard to whether or not he himself is or ever was liable in respect of the damage, provided, however, that he would have been liable assuming that the factual basis of the claim against him could be established. .
\tThe assessment of the contribution is provided for in section 2: \t"2(1)  Subject to subsection (3) below, in any proceedings for contribution under section 1 above the amount of the contribution recoverable from any person shall be such as may be found by the court to be just and equitable having regard to the extent of that person\'s responsibility for the damage in question .
\t"(2)  Subject to subsection (3) below, the court shall have power in any such proceedings to exempt any person from liability to make contribution, or to direct that the contribution to be recovered from any person shall amount to a complete indemnity .
Section 2(3) deals with certain limitations which are not relevant to the case before me .
\tOtherwise I need only mention section 7(3), which provides as follows: \t"7(3)  The right to recover contribution in accordance with section 1 above supersedes any right, other than an express contractual right, to recover contribution (as distinct from indemnity) otherwise than under this Act in corresponding circumstances; but nothing in this Act shall affect - \t\t(a) any express or implied contractual right to indemnity; or \t\t(b) any express contractual provision regulating or excluding contribution; \twhich would be enforceable apart from this Act (or render enforceable any agreement for indemnity or contribution which would not be enforceable apart from this Act). .
\tIn the present case it was not disputed, on the basis of my unreasoned findings, that Mr Salaam, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir (and for that matter Richco too at such time as Mr Salaam was claiming contribution from it) were all persons liable in respect of the same damage suffered by Dubal for the purposes of section 1(1) of the Act, and could therefore each claim contribution against the other or could each be the subject of a claim for contribution by any other .
It was also common ground that Mr Amhurst would have been liable in respect of the same damage on the assumption that the factual matters pleaded against him had been established: and could therefore likewise be the maker or receiver of a claim for contribution .
There was an important issue, however, whether the Amhurst partners "would have been liable assuming that the factual basis of the claim against [them] could be established" for the purposes of section 1(4) .
It was submitted that they would not have been liable, and therefore could not claim a contribution, or be liable to contribute .
That issue depends on section 10 of the Partnership Act, 1896, for it is common ground that the only basis on which the Amhurst partners could have been liable for Mr Amhurst\'s assumed wrongdoing was by virtue of that section, under which co-partners may be held liable for the wrongs of a partner acting in the ordinary course of the business of the firm .
It is not suggested that the Amhurst partners could have any but a vicarious liability in this case, or that there was any personal wrongdoing by other members of Mr Amhurst\'s firms .
I shall develop that issue below .
\tIf I held that the Amhurst partners would have been liable on the factual basis pleaded against them, then another issue which  arose was whether in those circumstances the Amhurst partners were to be treated as "innocent", because they were not personally tainted with Mr Amhurst\'s assumed wrongdoing, or whether they could only claim contribution on the same basis as that on which they were rendered liable, namely as bearing responsibility for Mr Amhurst\'s assumed dishonesty .
Mr Boswood submitted that because the Amhurst partners must be regarded as personally innocent, therefore they were entitled to a full indemnity under section 2(2) of the Act .
That was disputed by other parties .
\tA third issue was whether any liability to contribute should be several, or joint and several, in other words whether the risk of insolvency of a contributor should lie with the co-contributor or with the claimant for contribution .
\tOtherwise, the argument concerned of course the assessment of the contribution to be made by the various parties, ie the amount to be found in each case to be "just and equitable" for the purposes of section 2(1) .
In this connection the debate centred on the extent to which the size of each party\'s receipts should be viewed as more or less critical .
It was submitted by those who had received nothing, or comparatively little, viz by Mr Amhurst, the Amhurst partners, Richco and even Mr Livingstone, that the critical factor in the assessment ought to be the court\'s concern to see that those who had benefitted most should have their receipts taken from them: that no contributions should be ordered which would have the result of leaving receipts in the hands of those who had dishonestly obtained them .
It was submitted on the other hand by those who had benefitted most, ie Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir, that receipts were only one of a whole spectrum of factors to be taken into account, and that the court should not be blinded by a single element to overlook the very real and important contribution that other parties had made to the promotion and efficacy of the scheme, even though such parties had not received the direct proceeds of it - such as Mr Amhurst and therefore the Amhurst partners, or Richco .
\tThus the first group emphasised what Ferris J had said in K v. P [1993] Ch 140 at 149G, in the context of a third party claim, by a defendant accused of fraud, against the plaintiff\'s own accountant, who, the defendant alleged, had negligently failed to warn the plaintiff of the dangers inherent in the defendant\'s transactions: "In so far as the plaintiffs are seeking to recover from the third defendant money which he has obtained for his own benefit or for the benefit of companies which are, in effect, his alter ego, I can see that the third party would have an overwhelming argument that it cannot be just and equitable to require him to contribute to whatever the third defendant is ordered to pay to the plaintiffs .
Contribution, if ordered, would enable the third defendant or his fellow conspirators to retain part of the proceeds of their conspiracy or fraud. .
\tThe second group emphasised, however, that the receipts of fraud were not conclusive and for this purpose cited Downs v. Chappell  [1997] 1 WLR 426  .
There a plaintiff had purchased a bookshop on the fraudulent misrepresentation of the seller as to its turnover and profit figures, which had been negligently verified by the seller\'s accountant .
The fraudulent seller recovered a 50% contribution from the merely negligent accountant .
At 445F/H Hobhouse LJ said: \t"I do not consider that this court should interfere with the assessment of the judge .
Mr.Chappell was fraudulent .
He was very seriously at fault .
However it was not the statements he had made which induced the plaintiffs to buy .
On the evidence, and as found by the judge, it was what was said in the letter of 24 May which induced the plaintiffs to contract .
The plaintiff required the confirmation of the second defendants .
The letter written by the second defendants purported to give them that confirmation .
The letter was written recklessly .
It contained statements which the second defendants must have known they had no basis for .
The second defendants are liable to the plaintiffs because of their own reckless negligence .
Indeed, on a strict view, their lack of care was a breach of their duty to Mr.Chappell as well .
"The extent of a person\'s responsibility involves both the degree of his fault and the degree to which it contributed to the damage in question .
It is just and equitable to take into account both the seriousness of the respective parties\' faults and their causative relevance .
A more serious fault having less causative impact on the plaintiff\'s damage may represent an equivalent responsibility to a less serious fault which had a greater causative impact .
The present case is such a case .
The judge was entitled to decline to distinguish between the responsibility of the two defendants for the damage of the plaintiffs. .
Ex turpi causa non oritur actio \tI have myself raised the question whether it is open to the court to consider contribution claims on behalf of parties who have been found guilty of dishonest assistance or dishonest receipts .
All parties submit that it is, and that the Act takes precedence over any consequence of the rule of  ex turpi causa  .
\tIt seems that although the matter is regarded by GOFF and JONES, The Law of Restitution, 4th Edition, 1993, at 329, as an open question or even subject to a prohibition on the enforcement of an illegal transaction, there has now been authority that a defence of  ex turpi causa  does not run in a contribution claim under the Act: see K v. P [1993] Ch 140 at 148H/149B .
Moreover, in Downs v. Chappell the court of appeal awarded contribution in favour of the fraudulent against the merely negligent .
In any event, it does not seem to me that I am being asked to enforce an illegal transaction .
The receipts \tIn the light of the submission that the receipts of fraud are critical to the division of responsibility, it is necessary to restate the figures .
\tIn my Unreasoned Findings I found that Mr Salaam had received $21,846,488; that Mr Al Tajir had received $15,604,878; that Mr Livingstone had received $6,327,918; that Mr Amhurst and the Amhurst Partners had received nothing (other than professional fees); and that Richco had received $50,117,622 but had in turn paid on $49,780,944 under the subsidiary agreements .
\tFurther submissions made to me in the second half of the trial necessitate some refinement to those figures .
\tIt was submitted on behalf of Mr Salaam that the figure of $21,846,488 overstated his  net  receipts, because it included monies paid to him or his companies which he had passed on to Mr Al Tajir in the period prior to August 1988 (which was when Mr Al Tajir had begun to require payment directly into the account of Al Tajir Ltd) .
It therefore followed, the submission continued, that the figure of $15,604,878 in the case of Mr Al Tajir correspondingly understated Mr Al Tajir\'s true receipts .
On behalf of Mr Al Tajir, Mr Malek submitted that there was insufficient evidence to show that Mr Al Tajir had benefitted from any payments prior to August 1988: but he accepted that I was fully entitled to revise the figures in my Unreasoned Findings, if it seemed to me to be right to do so .
I am persuaded by the evidence before me that Mr Al Tajir must have shared for his 40% in the payments prior to August 1988, and that the only reason why those payments cannot be definitively traced to him is that the account from which Mr Salaam made the payments out is not in discovery, while Mr Al Tajir has provided no discovery .
Even so, I can accept that the schedule of payments annexed to Mr Davis\'s closing submissions in the contribution proceedings, which sets out details extracted from the accounting material before me, is accurate in showing that over the period from February to April 1988 Mr Al Tajir must have received $861,791.24 from Mr Salaam .
It follows that the figure for Mr Salaam\'s net receipts must be adjusted downwards to $20,338,348.42, and Mr Al Tajir\'s receipts must rise to $16,466,669.46 .
\tIt is possible, and perhaps likely, that a similar adjustment ought to be made for the payments out that Mr Salaam would have made to Mr Livingstone, prior to Mr Livingstone receiving payments directly into his Utary account in November 1990; and there is also the mysterious matter of the $1.4 million paid to Mr Salaam in December 1989 which would seem to be connected to a credit by Mr Livingstone in favour of Mr Salaam; but Mr Salaam has not sought to press or to quantify those possibilities .
So no adjustment need be made on that score .
\tAs for Richco\'s receipts, the net difference between the sums received and paid out by Richco is $366,678, and that is a figure which has frequently been mentioned in the proceedings .
It seems to me, however, that that figure ignores the fact that by reason of the capitalised payments Richco paid out under the subsidiary agreements large sums in advance of reimbursement through its regular continuing income under its consultancy agreement .
Effectively, therefore, Richco paid out more than it received .
I shall therefore regard Richco\'s net receipts as being nil .
I shall also bear in mind, however, that Richco had intended to benefit from the scheme by at least the amount of the 0.5% to be retained from the 2.5% fee on sales, or a figure of some $8 million .
\tI also bear in mind that, receipts apart, I have found that Mr Salaam\'s dishonest assistance led to Dubal\'s gross loss of $50,117,622, that Mr Livingstone, Mr Al Tajir and Richco were dishonest participants in the scheme, that Mr Amhurst must be treated as dishonestly assisting the scheme in his role as a solicitor, and that each of them played an important and substantial, and not merely peripheral or incidental, role in the scheme (Unreasoned Finding para 10) .
Interest, and the value of the settlement agreements .
\tThe fact that the capitalised payments were themselves discounted for early payment and thus of course represent larger sums which were to have been paid in the regular way over the outstanding years of the subsidiary agreements, is an example of the importance of interest, ie the time value of money, in the calculation of final liabilities and also in the calculation of contributions .
This point assumes particular importance when the various settlements come to be factored in .
Thus Dubal\'s losses occurred over a period of time commencing in September 1987 and increasing month by month down to February 1993, when they reached the total principal figure of $50,117,622 .
Payments stopped in March 1993, with the termination of the Richco consultancy agreement .
Then on 31 January 1996 came Mr Livingstone\'s settlement in the sum of $15,540,000 .
The settlement agreement gives a settlement date of 21 February 1996 .
\tThe question arises: what is the credit to be allowed in respect of the Livingstone settlement .
Dubal submitted that the credit should be regarded as no more than the sum which Mr Livingstone has been found to have received under the Richco scheme, namely $6,327,918 .
It was submitted on behalf of Mr Livingstone, however, that the whole of the sum of $15,540,000 paid under the Livingstone settlement ought to be regarded as credited to Dubal for the purpose of its present claim in these proceedings .
This was a dispute worth some $9,000,000 about which I heard very little argument .
In my judgment, the credit which has to be allowed is the full sum of $15,540,000 .
It is true that the claims in the Livingstone action embraced matters which went much wider than the payments made under the Richco consultancy agreement alone: it is possible therefore that some, most or even all of Dubal\'s recovery under the Livingstone settlement could have been properly allocated to claims other than Dubal\'s claim in these proceedings .
The fact is, however, that no allocation was agreed in the Livingstone settlement .
The Livingstone points of claim included (inter alia) a claim for the full sum lost by reason of payments under the Richco consultancy agreement in the sum there stated of $49,951,828 .
Although I may have overlooked it, I cannot even find a separate reference in that pleading to a receipts based claim in the sum of $6,327,918 .
Whereas Dubal\'s losses for the purposes of the present proceedings have been proved before me, the other claims included in the Livingstone proceedings have not been proved before me, and I have no particular insight into them .
It seems to me that ultimately it is Dubal which bears the legal burden of proving its loss .
If, therefore, it wishes to say that the $15,540,000 received from Mr Livingstone should not be credited to its present claim, but should be apportioned in some way across the whole gamut of the claims made in the Livingstone proceedings, then I think that Dubal bears that burden of proof .
It has not even sought to discharge that burden .
In the circumstances Dubal must give credit in these proceedings for the full amount of $15,540,000 .
\tThe next question which arises is: how much of that $15,540,000 should represent principal and how much should represent interest .
That is important so that the various settlement agreements, all of which occurred at different times, and of which the Livingstone settlement occurred significantly earlier than any of the others, can be fairly measured against one another .
Many of the submissions before me, including written submissions which followed the Al Tajir settlement at a time prior to the handing out of my draft judgment, confused or so it seemed to me the value of the various settlement payments because they did not take into account the fact that such payments represented a combination of principal and interest .
It is only in the light of interest calculations that it is possible to evaluate the various settlements on a like for like basis .
\tFor these purposes, however, it was necessary to adopt a definitive interest rate .
For instance, should it be a simple rate, or a compound rate .
In either event, at what level .
The parties informed me that they wished to address further submissions on such matters after the handing down of my judgment .
I was unable therefore to adopt a definitive interest rate while writing my draft judgment .
At that time, however, I did have to hand calculations which Dubal had provided illustrating the build-up of interest month by month on the basis of simple interest at 1%, alternatively 2%, over the prevailing US dollar LIBOR for 3 month deposits, and also on the basis of the same alternative rates applied to interest compounded at annual rests .
Working with such tables, I discovered that significant differences ensued dependent on whether, for instance, the highest rate claimed by Dubal was applied, viz 2% above LIBOR compound, or the lowest, viz 1% above LIBOR simple .
Ultimately such differences could have had a significant effect upon my dispositions in the contribution proceedings, as I pointed out in my draft judgment .
This was because the applicable interest rate would affect the question of how much parties such as Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir should be regarded as having received from the proceeds of the scheme .
It was and is my view, as I will elaborate below, following what Ferris J said in K v. P, that the level of a contributing party\'s dishonest receipts is of particular importance in evaluating what is just and equitable for the purpose of section 2(1) of the Act .
The question of such receipts therefore bore directly on the Amhurst partners\' contribution claim, for they had had no such receipts .
It also bore on the question of Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Al Tajir\'s respective liabilities to contribute .
\tFollowing the Salaam settlement and the final hearing after the distribution of my draft judgment, these difficulties were considerably simplified in two respects .
First of all, the Salaam settlement, because it limited Mr Salaam\'s liability to $18,000,000 payable over the period from 1 April 1998 to 31 December 1999, meant that on any view Mr Salaam was paying out very much less than he had received .
He had, after all, received $20,338,348 over the period from September 1987 to April 1991, while he is repaying only $18,000,000 some decade or so later .
It follows that, whatever interest rate regime applies, Mr Salaam is very far from disgorging his receipts .
Secondly, I am now in a position to fix a definitive interest rate .
The two factors are to a degree interconnected in that I can be assured that the particular interest rate applied will not have a critical effect on other issues .
To an extent, therefore, I can adopt a broader brush than I might have otherwise wielded .
\tAt the final hearing there was evidence before me that Dubal and companies like it could have (and in fact did) borrow during the relevant periods at a rate of about 0.5% above LIBOR; and that an appropriate compound rate to reflect what a person like Mr Salaam or Mr Al Tajir might have done with their receipts was 0.1875% below LIBOR .
The former evidence was advanced on the basis that whereas the usual Commercial Court practice is to award interest at bank rate or minimum lending rate or equivalent  plus 1%, the practice is only a presumption which can be displaced by evidence of the rate at which plaintiffs with the general attributes of the actual plaintiff in the case could borrow money: see Shearson Lehman Hutton v. Maclaine Watson & Co (No 2) [1990] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 441 at 451/2 .
The latter evidence was advanced on the basis that when compound interest is awarded, the rate of interest should reflect the value of money to a defendant, not a plaintiff, and should be fixed by reference to the return which a defendant earned or may reasonably be taken to have earned with the money: see Mathew v. T M Sutton Ltd [1994] 1 WLR 1455 and Kleinwort Benson Ltd v. South Tyneside Metropolitan Borough Council [1994] 4 All ER 972, 991a .
There was debate before me as to whether it was appropriate to use a compound rate and, if so, whether such a rate should properly be confined to sums dishonestly received, as distinct from sums in respect of which there had been only knowing assistance (as in the case of the Amhurst defendants) .
\tIt seems to me that in the light of the Salaam settlement it is preferable to seek simplicity rather than perfect accuracy .
Dubal no longer had any interest in the matter .
The difference between 0.5% above LIBOR simple and 0.1875% below LIBOR compound is not significant, although the latter yields more than the former .
I am not persuaded that the finer borrowing rates of 0.5% apply to the smaller sums of money (large as they are) that I am dealing with in this case, as distinct from the extremely large medium term loans of which evidence was given: such loans typically also involved commitment and other fees .
Nor am I persuaded that the benefit to the recipients is to be measured by the rate at which they could have put the money on deposit as distinct from the rate at which they might have avoided the need to borrow .
Taking all such matters into consideration, it seems to me that the fairest and simplest solution is to apply a standard 1% above LIBOR simple to all calculations .
\tI am now in a position to value each of the settlements on a like for like basis .
The Livingstone settlement .
This involved a payment of what I have taken to be $15,540,000 as of 21 February 1996 .
With the aid of interest tables provided to me as an annex to the affidavit of Mr Stephen Podgorney, a chartered accountant, I calculate that this settlement represented a repayment of principal in what I shall call the "baseline" sum of $11,409,691 2plus interest (at 1% above LIBOR simple) of $4,130,309 .
I make that assessment by calculating that as at three-quarters through February 1996 the interest (at 1% over LIBOR simple) on Dubal\'s claim stood at $18,121,481, an increase of 36.2% over Dubal\'s original claim of $50,117,622 .
Discounting the Livingstone settlement by the appropriate amount ($15,540,000 ... 136.2% x 100%) gives a baseline $11,409,691 .
Mr Livingstone therefore paid Dubal approximately 22.8% of its original claim .
[22] The Amhurst settlement .
This was dated 12 November 1997 and provided that the payment of $10,000,000 would be made within 21 days of various events including the executed counterparts of the agreement .
I will assume that the payment was made on the last day of November 1997 .
By then the interest on Dubal\'s original claim had, as I calculate, risen to $24,014,348, an increase of 47.9% ($24,014,348 = 47.9% of $50,117,622) .
It follows that a payment of $10,000,000 represents a baseline of $6,761,325 in principal and $3,238,675 in interest .
The Amhurst defendants therefore paid Dubal approximately 13.5% of its original claim .
\tDubal submitted that only $9,250,000 out of the Amhurst settlement should be regarded as reflecting payment of principal and interest, and $750,000 should be regarded as allocated to costs .
However, the settlement agreement provides for the making of a court order to the effect that Dubal\'s claims against the Amhurst defendants should be dismissed "with no order as to costs" and that the parties to the agreement "agree not to enforce any earlier costs orders between them" .
It seems to me therefore that no part of the $10,000,000 should be regarded as allocated to costs .
The Al Tajir settlement .
The Al Tajir settlement is dated 13 January 1998 and provides for the payment of $6,000,000 (with interest at 2% above 3 month LIBOR from 31 December 1997) to be paid on 31 January 1998, a further $6,000,000 to be paid on 31 December 1998 and a final $6,000,000 to be paid on 31 December 1999 .
It follows that for interest purposes I must regard the first instalment as having been paid on 31 December 1997, but I shall disregard the consensual rate of LIBOR plus 2% and continue to work with my conventional figure of LIBOR plus 1% .
3 month LIBOR so far in 1998 has been approximately 5.65% .
I shall assume therefore that LIBOR plus 1% will remain at 6.65% for the rest of 1998 and 1999 .
That means that the $6,000,000 payable at end 1998 is approximately the same as $5,625,879 at end 1997, and that the $6,000,000 payable at end 1999 is approximately the same as $5,295,675 payable at end 1997 .
Thus as of 31 December 1997 the Al Tajir settlement is worth some $16,921,554 .
At that time the interest on Dubal\'s original claim would have been some $24,308,454, a rise of 48.5% .
$16,921,554 as at 31 December 1997 therefore represents a baseline $11,394,985 in principal plus some $5,526,569 in interest .
The Al Tajir settlement therefore represents some 22.7% of Dubal\'s original claim .
The Salaam settlement .
The total of this settlement is also $18,000,000, but payable as to $3,000,000 on 2 April 1998, $6,000,000 on 1 June 1998, $3,000,000 on 25 August 1998, and $6,000,000 on 31 December 1999 .
On the same basis as the calculations I have already indicated in connection with the Al Tajir settlement, I assess the value of the Salaam settlement as of 31 December 1997 as being $16,962,422 .
That in turn represents  a baseline $11,422,506 in principal and $5,539,916 in interest .
The Salaam settlement therefore represents some 22.8% of Dubal\'s original claim .
Mr Amhurst\'s responsibility \tI have left detailed consideration of Mr Amhurst\'s responsibility to this point because, by reason of the Amhurst settlement and the withdrawal of all allegations against him, the matter must now be considered, pursuant to section 1(4) of the Act, on an assumed basis by reference to the facts pleaded against him .
Those pleadings included allegations of dishonest receipt and also that Mr Amhurst together with Mr Salaam was the ultimate beneficial owner of Nillet, JMS, Valo and WID: but the case was opened by Dubal on the basis that Mr Amhurst had received none of the proceeds of the scheme and did not share in the ownership of the Salaam companies, and I therefore regard the pleadings as having been inferentially and implicitly amended to take account of those concessions .
There remains a case of dishonest assistance, which it is common ground would have rendered Mr Amhurst liable on the assumed basis that the facts pleaded against him could be established .
\tThose pleaded facts are to the following effect .
Mr Amhurst was a solicitor, and a director of a number of companies in Mr Salaam\'s group, including Valo; he represented to Richco that he held powers of attorney for Nillet and JMS; he drafted or dictated the drafting of the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements and was involved with Mr Livingstone in their negotiation, so much so that he "appeared to be part of the Dubal team"; he informed Richco that it was required to concur in the scheme if it was to do business in Dubai or with Dubal;  he knew and made known to Richco that it was not expected to supply services pursuant to its consultancy agreement or to be supplied with services under the subsidiary agreements and that the scheme was a mere vehicle for payment, and thus knew that the Richco consultancy agreement and the subsidiary agreements were shams; he executed the subsidiary agreements on behalf of the Salaam companies; thereafter he was "centrally involved in the administration" of the scheme, eg by giving instructions to Richco concerning the payment of money .
In sum, he as well as Mr Salaam "dishonestly procured and/or assisted Livingstone to act in breach of his said fiduciary duties by conceiving, planning and assisting in giving effect to the scheme" .
\tSo it was that in my Unreasoned Findings I found that Mr Amhurst must be treated as having dishonestly assisted the scheme in his role as a solicitor, and that, like the other participants, he had played (ie must be assumed to have played) an important and substantial and not merely peripheral or incidental role in the scheme .
The Amhurst partners\' liability \tI come now to one of the major points of principle argued before me on the contribution proceedings .
Mr Salaam, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir (but not Richco or Mr Amhurst) submitted that on the facts pleaded by Dubal against the Amhurst partners they could not have been made liable to Dubal .
The Amhurst partners, on the other hand, who could not otherwise have claimed the contribution and indeed full indemnity that they were seeking for their payment of $10,000,000, submitted that on the pleaded facts they would have been liable .
For this purpose they confined themselves to liability under section 10 of the Partnership Act 1890, pleaded in Dubal\'s points of claim at para 7.6, and did not pursue the alternative basis on which Dubal had alleged liability under para 7.5 where Dubal had alleged that Mr Amhurst\'s knowledge and therefore dishonesty was to be attributed to each of them .
In para 7.6 of its points of claim Dubal had pleaded as follows: "Further or in the alternative to the previous paragraph hereof, at trial, Dubal will say that the firms of ABMN and ABC are liable to Dubal to the same extent as is Amhurst in respect of those acts or omissions alleged against him in section 6 above as were committed by him while a partner therein, to the extent that such acts alleged against him were carried out by him in the ordinary course of ABMN\'s and/or ABC\'s business. .
That pleading is clearly intended to invoke section 10 of the Partnership Act, which provides as follows: "Where, by any wrongful act or omission of any partner acting in the ordinary course of the business of the firm, or with the authority of his co-partners, loss or injury is caused to any person not being a partner in the firm, or any penalty is incurred, the firm is liable therefor to the same extent as the partner so acting or omitting to act. .
\tIt is not entirely clear what matters pleaded against Mr Amhurst are alleged to have been carried out by Mr Amhurst in the ordinary course of the firms\' business: but the clue I think is in para 7 as a whole, where Dubal pleads that the scheme agreements were drafted or dictated by Mr Amhurst "in his capacity as a partner" and, I would infer, that payment instructions were similarly given by him in the name of his firm .
That is how Mr Boswood put it in paras 8/9 of his submissions in the contribution proceedings, and I think that is right .
\tThe Amhurst partners\' case in their points of defence, perhaps not surprisingly, had been to the contrary effect .
They had there admitted that at any rate the subsidiary agreements had been drafted by Mr Amhurst as a partner of the firms, but liability had been denied (para 7 of the Amhurst defendants\' points of defence) .
In his opening submissions Mr Boswood had submitted that the Amhurst partners were not liable for much the same reasons as have now been deployed against him in the contribution proceedings .
\tThus it is now submitted against the Amhurst partners that Mr Amhurst\'s liability for dishonest assistance is a liability in constructive trust, and not in tort; that section 10 is concerned with liability in tort or by reason of agency but not in constructive trust; that liability in constructive trust is rather the subject matter of sections 11 or 13, which do not here apply and are not alleged to apply; that whether or not section 10 is capable of applying, it is not in the ordinary course of business, nor within the actual or ostensible authority of a partner, to make himself a constructive trustee; that these submissions are covered by authority; and that in the result the Amhurst partners could not have been made liable under section 10 even on the assumption that the factual basis of the claim pleaded against Mr Amhurst and his partners had been established .
\tOn the other hand, it is submitted on behalf of the Amhurst partners (supported by Mr Amhurst and Richco) that the drafting of contracts is plainly within the ordinary business of solicitors, even if that is done as part of a scheme of dishonest assistance to a breach of trust; that there is nothing to prevent a firm or company being vicariously liable for such dishonest assistance and that section 10 is intended to deal with vicarious liability in general; that the line of authority relied on by the opposing parties was of uncertain value in the light of the principles vindicated for instance in Lloyd v. Grace Smith  [1912] AC 716 , and had in any event not been followed in the most recent case of Agip (Africa) Ltd v. Jackson & Others [1990] Ch 265,  [1991] Ch 547  (CA) .
\tIt is true that liability in dishonest assistance is not a liability in tort: Generale Bank Nederland NV v. ECGD (CA, 23 July 1997, unreported) at 53A, 59C .
Rather it is a liability in equity to pay damages based on fault: as Chadwick J said in The Arab Monetary Fund v. Hashim (29 July 1994, unreported) at 42B: "...the defendant is held liable in equity not because he is, or has been, a trustee of trust property; but because his conduct in relation to trust property has been such that he ought to be liable in damages for its loss as if he were a trustee who had disposed of the trust property in breach of trust .
The claim is a claim for monetary compensation based on fault..." The question is whether there can be vicarious liability pursuant to section 10 for such fault .
It is common ground, and in any event my judgment, that section 10 is setting out a rule of vicarious liability .
\tThe submission, therefore, is in effect that the wrong of dishonest assistance can never be effected in the ordinary course of a firm\'s business; or that, whether it can or whether it cannot, even so on the true construction of sections 10, 11 and 13, equity based remedies (other than tracing) are confined to cases where third party funds are received by the firm within the ordinary scope of its business (section 11) or where the other partners have notice of a breach of trust (section 13(1)), and that section 10 is confined to liability in tort .
\tIn this connection the line of authority relied on by Mr Salaam and others begins with the obiter dicta of the court of appeal in Mara v. Browne [1896] 1 Ch 199 .
The case was argued after the Partnership Act but on facts arising before it came into effect .
There two brothers HB and AB were in partnership together as solicitors .
HB acted as solicitor to a trust and as such handled trust funds and applied them to specific investments on the instructions of trustees .
It was argued (and had been found in the court below) that HB had constituted himself a constructive trustee and was therefore liable to make good losses resulting from improper investments, and that his partner AB was therefore also liable .
The court of appeal disagreed, finding that HB had merely acted as a solicitor on instructions .
Each member of the court however went on to say that even if HB had been liable as a trustee, his brother would not have been .
Lord Herschell said (at 208): "The only case against him is that, during the period covered by these transactions, he was in partnership as a solicitor with the other defendant .
He took no part in them, and was ignorant of their nature .
In my opinion, it is not within the scope of the implied authority of a partner in such a business that he should so act as to make himself a constructive trustee, and thereby subject his partner to the same liability. .
AL Smith LJ (at 212) and Rigby LJ (at 214) opined to similar effect .
\tThe matter did not arise for decision until the case of In re Bell\'s Indenture [1980] 1 WLR 1217 .
There trustees dissipated a trust fund with the active assistance of one Hickley, who was a partner in a firm of solicitors which acted for the trustees .
Hickley died, and it was conceded that he was liable as a constructive trustee .
Hickley\'s partner Heaver, who it was agreed had always acted honestly and reasonably, was nevertheless said to be liable, by reason of sections 10 and 11, on the ground that, whenever trust funds are received by a firm of solicitors and applied for a purpose which one of the partners knows to be a breach of trust, all the partners are liable to make good that breach .
Vinelott J referred to this as an "at first sight somewhat surprising proposition" (at 1226A) .
At 1230E he referred to the dicta in Mara v. Browne and continued: \t"Although elliptically expressed, as I understand the judgment, what Lord Herschell is saying is that a solicitor has the implied authority of his partners to receive trust moneys as agent of the trustees but does not have the implied authority to constitute himself a constructive trustee .
Nor, I would add, does a solicitor in the ordinary course of his practice have the implied authority of his co-partners to accept office as a trustee and so make his co-partners liable for a misapplication of the trust property; as to this last point, see  In re Fryer  (1857) 3 K. & J .
317, where it was held that the partners of a solicitor who received money as a trustee which was lost were not liable for his default, the moneys having been received by him as trustee and not as a solicitor .
\t"If that is the correct principle, it can make no difference to the liability of the partners of a solicitor who does constitute himself a constructive trustee whether the moneys are paid into his private account or into his firm\'s client account .
In  Blyth v. Fladgate  the firm became trustees because there were no trustees at the time when trust moneys were received by them and they could not therefore be considered agents of the trustees .
"In my judgment therefore the claim against Mr Heaver\'s executors is misconceived. .
\tAlso relied on in this connection was the New Zealand case of Estate Realities v. Wignall [1992] 2 NZLR 615 .
The New Zealand Partnership Act\'s sections 12, 13 and 16 are in the same terms as the English Act\'s sections 9, 10 and 13 respectively .
Two partners in a firm of stockbrokers were in breach of fiduciary duty to a client by buying from that client shares in a company for themselves .
A third partner was away at the time and ignorant of this breach .
Tipping J, who considered the English authorities, held that the third partner, Wignall, could not be made liable to account for the secret profit made out of the company .
It is relevant to point out that a fair price was paid for the shares, which was why the client sued for an account and not for loss or injury (at 633.37/9) .
Tipping J held that the partners at fault had acted in the ordinary course of the business of the firm (at 633.30 and 635.19) .
He reasoned, however, that despite that, they had no implied authority to constitute themselves constructive trustees in relation to the shares, and therefore Wignall could not be one either .
He said (at 635.17/29): "I am not unmindful of the fact that the breach of fiduciary duty by Messrs Egden and Norbutt-Munns which renders them liable as constructive trustees occurred during the course of the ordinary business of the firm .
However it seems to me to be both fair and sound in principle to take the view that Mr Wignall did not become himself a constructive trustee, as their partner, unless and until he had such knowledge of the circumstances as to make it appropriate to tax him as a constructive trustee as well .
The position is not covered by ss 12, 13 and 16 which deals respectively with contractual obligations, tortious obligations and obligations for breach of trust and thus depends on general principles .
On that basis I do not consider Mr Wignall should be regarded as a constructive trustee and liable to account..." \tOn the other side Mr Boswood cites Agip (Africa) Ltd v. Jackson [1990] Ch 265,  [1991] Ch 547  where Millett J at first instance and the court of appeal found an accountant, Bowers, vicariously liable for the dishonest assistance of his partner, Jackson, as well as of his employee, Griffin: at 296E, 570D .
It has to be said that there appears to have been no dispute that the vicarious liability of Bowers followed automatically upon the liability of his partner, and there is no citation in the judgments of the Partnership Act or of Mara v. Browne and In re Bell\'s Indenture .
It may be that the matter was conceded: it is to be remarked that both partners had the same legal representation .
Even so, In re Bell\'s Indenture had been cited in argument to Millett J, albeit on a different point (at 270E), and it is difficult to assume that the courts would not have been familiar with the principle, if it is as fundamental as before me it has been suggested to be .
Even so, I think I have to accept that the Agip case, which might otherwise have been binding on me, is of uncertain authority .
\tI was also referred to LINDLEY & BANKS, 17th Edition, 1995, at 12-21, 12-29, 12-118 and 12-141 and SNELL\'s Equity, 29th Edition, 1990, at 194, where Mara v. Browne and In re Bell\'s Indenture are cited without criticism, and to UNDERHILL and HAYTON, Law Relating to Trusts and Trustees, 15th Edition, 1995, where, on the other hand, it is remarked that In re Bell\'s Indenture has been criticised on the ground that the trust money had been received by the firm in the course of its business, and reference was made to Agip .
In the event, the text-books do not really carry me beyond the cases .
\tI have to confess that I cannot see any reason in principle why a Barnes v. Addy type of accessory liability for breach of trust should not be at least capable of giving rise to vicarious liability in circumstances where a partner guilty of accessory liability has acted in the ordinary course of his partnership business .
I do not see why it should be a principle of law, rather than a question of fact, or at most mixed fact and law, whether a partner has acted in the ordinary course of business in dishonestly assisting a breach of trust .
Of course, no one is authorised to be dishonest or through dishonesty to render himself liable as though he were a trustee .
That, however, is a familiar problem, or at any rate has become so since the landmark decision in Lloyd v. Grace Smith  [1912] AC 716  .
No one (generally speaking) is authorised or employed to be fraudulent, but even so it may be that an employee commits fraud in the scope of his employment or a partner does so in the course of his ordinary business .
Lloyd v. Grace Smith concerned the case of an employee, and a slightly earlier decision, Hamlyn v. John Houston & Co [1903] 1 KB 81 (CA) concerned the case of a partner .
There Collins MR said this (at 85/6): "Was it within the scope of the authority given to Houston to obtain this information by legitimate means .
If so, it was within the scope of his authority for the present purpose to obtain it by illegitimate means, and the defendants are liable .
That is the law as expressed in the Partnership Act, 1890, and as laid down by the decisions previous to that Act, in which it has been held that a principal is liable for the fraud or other wrongful act of his agent if committed within the scope of his employment .
The grounds upon which it seems to rest, as explained in such cases as  Barwick v. English Joint Stock Bank  appear to be that the principal is the person who has selected the agent, and must therefore be taken to have better means of knowing what sort of person he was than those with whom the agent deals on behalf of his principal; and that, the principal having delegated the performance of a certain class of acts to the agent, it is not unjust that he, being the person who has appointed the agent, and who will have the benefit of his efforts if successful, should bear the risk of his exceeding his authority in matters incidental to the doing of the acts the performance of which has been delegated to him. .
The wrong in that case was not, as it happened, the tort of deceit, but consisted in bribing an employee of the plaintiffs to disclose confidential information and documents .
There is no discussion in the report of the precise nature of the wrong committed by the guilty partner, but although I am prepared to assume that it was tortious, the wrong is not very different from dishonest assistance in a breach of trust, and if the bribery had been directed at a director of the plaintiffs, I do not see why one among other possible remedies might not have been in equity .
It is also interesting to note that the question whether the partner had been acting within the scope of his authority had been left to the jury (at 85) .
In due course, Lloyd v. Grace Smith was also decided on the same ground, interpreting Barwick v. English Joint Stock Bank (an authority which the House of Lords said had been misunderstood, see at 725, 731) as standing in the line of authorities going back to Holt CJ\'s famous dictum in Hern v. Nichol (undated, c1700) 1 Salk 289 that - "for seeing that somebody must be a loser by this deceit, it is more reason that he that employs and puts a trust and confidence in the deceiver should be the loser than a stranger. .
Lord MacNaghten made a passing reference to partners at 738, where he said: "If Sandles had been a partner in fact, Mr Smith would have been liable for the fraud of Sandles as his agent .
It is a hardship to be liable for the fraud of your partner .
But that is the law under the Partnership Act. .
\tThere is of course a line to be drawn between the Lloyd v. Grace Smith situation, where the employer has given the employee apparent authority to commit the tort, and the Ruben v. Great Fingall Consolidated [1906] AC 439 situation, where the servant has merely taken the opportunity afforded by his service to commit some wrong otherwise than in the course of doing that class of acts which he was employed to do: see Morris v. Martin [1966] 1 QB 716 at 727, 737, Armagas v. Mundogas  [1986] 1 AC 717  .
\tIn the present case, however, the submission is not that Mr Amhurst\'s acts in drafting the contracts and thereby lending dishonest assistance to the scheme fell on the wrong side of that line, but that liability as a constructive trustee could never fall within section 10, because it was not a tort, or because it could never be incurred in the ordinary course of business .
So the question is whether section 10 or the authorities upon it require that conclusion .
\tSection 10 itself is in the widest terms: it refers to "any wrongful act or omission" causing "loss or injury" or the incurring of a penalty .
I do not see why that language cannot  extend beyond torts properly so called to wrongs such as accessory liability in equity .
To confine it solely to torts is to construe the section with excessive formalism, and I do not see what there is in the language of the section to suggest such formalism .
Section 11 provides that the firm is liable to make good loss caused by the misapplication of a third person\'s money or property received by either a partner "acting within the scope of his apparent authority" or by the firm "in the course of its business" .
That section only applies therefore in the case of receipt of property .
It does not seem to me to follow that in a case otherwise within section 10 it matters whether or not a third party\'s property has been received by a partner or the firm .
Section 11 rather seems to me to be saying that in the case of the misapplication of property received by a partner or the firm, it is only where the property is received in the ordinary course of the firm\'s business that the firm can be made liable for the misapplications of any partner .
The underlying principle is therefore consistent with section 10 .
Finally, section 13 deals with the position where a partner accepts the responsibility of being a trustee ("If a partner, being a trustee,...") and states that liability will only attach beyond the partner in question for misuse of trust funds in the partnership business where the funds can be traced or a partner has notice of the breach of trust .
That section, however, appears to assume that the individual trusteeships which a partner may undertake are not something undertaken in the ordinary course of business, otherwise it would be inconsistent with section 11: see LINDLEY & BANKS at 12-136 .
That seems to me to leave open the situation where a partner, not being a trustee, nevertheless so conducts himself as an accessory to a breach of trust, that he is visited in equity with the remedies available against a constructive trustee: I do not see why that situation cannot be dealt with under the general principle enunciated in section 10 .
I therefore see nothing in the terms of the Partnership Act itself to limit the application of section 10 to torts alone, even though they may have been the primary focus of the section in its origin .
I do not think that Tipping J intended to say that the New Zealand equivalent of section 10 was confined exclusively to torts .
\tAs for the authorities, in Mara v. Browne the critical question  was whether the partner concerned had been acting as a solicitor on instructions from trustees or whether he had been intermeddling in the trust .
In their obiter dicta the court of appeal appear to have doubted that a solicitor would be acting in the ordinary course of his business if he did intermeddle so as to render himself liable as a constructive trustee .
That must, however, it seems to me, ultimately be a question of fact .
In this connection, it is as well perhaps to have in mind what Staughton LJ said in United Bank of Kuwait Ltd v. Hammoud [1988] 1 WLR 1051 at 1063F, where, having referred to some "elderly" cases on the subject of the ordinary authority of a solicitor, he remarked: "That material should today be treated with caution, in my judgment; the work that solicitors do can be expected to have changed since 1888; it has changed in recent times and is changing now .
So I prefer to have regard to the expert evidence of today in deciding what is the ordinary authority of a solicitor. .
\tIn In re Bell\'s Indenture Vinelott J looked at the matter in the context of express trusts .
He regarded Lord Herschell as saying that a solicitor is authorised to receive trust monies as agent of the trustees, but not to constitute himself a constructive trustee in respect of those funds .
He appears to have thought that that also followed from the fact that a solicitor is not authorised in the ordinary way to accept office as a trustee .
It seems to me, however, that accessory liability is not necessarily the same thing .
In such a case there is no express trust, but the law imposes a remedy in equity where someone has dishonestly assisted another to breach his fiduciary duty .
That may well happen as part and parcel of the assistor\'s ordinary work, just as here, on the assumed facts, Mr Amhurst was assisting Mr Livingstone as part and parcel of his work as a solicitor in drafting the scheme agreements .
\tIn Estate Realties v. Wignall Tipping J appears to have found that there would have been liability within section 13 (England\'s section 10), if the plaintiff had suffered any loss at the time of the sale of the shares (at 633.28/39); similarly he found that the partners had then acted in the ordinary course of their firm\'s business .
To that extent the case is, I think, an authority in Mr Boswood\'s favour .
What he declined to find, however, is that thereafter the partners were acting in the ordinary course of their firm\'s business in managing the company whose shares they had bought and in deriving a large profit from the shares\' ultimate sale a year later .
Their liability could only be as constructive trustees liable to an account, and the judge refused to find that Mr Wignall should also be liable to account as a constructive trustee, when he was in ignorance of the scheme .
It seems to me, therefore, that this case does not assist Mr Davis .
\tAt the end of the day, the closest case on the facts is the Agip case .
Although its authority is much weakened by the factors I have discussed above, the very naturalness of its decision carries a certain force .
Having given careful consideration to the submissions and authorities presented to me, I conclude that there is no general principle of law, or matter of construction of the relevant sections of the Partnership Act, or authority, which compels me to hold that Mr Amhurst was acting outside the ordinary business of his partnerships when, as I must assume, he dishonestly assisted Mr Livingstone in the scheme by the drafting and negotiation of the scheme contracts .
The subsidiary agreements were contracts directly involving his clients, Mr Salaam and the Salaam companies .
The Richco consultancy agreement did not directly involve his clients, but it closely interested them, and I do not see why a client may not as a matter of ordinary business instruct his solicitor to assist in the negotiation of such a contract .
In any event, I do not see why the question of whether the relevant acts of Mr Amhurst were within the ordinary course of the Amhurst partners\' business, raised by para 7.6 of Dubal\'s points of claim, is not ultimately a question of fact, as it were for the jury ( cf  Hamlyn v. Houston & Co), which I must assume (for present purposes) in favour of the Amhurst partners .
\tI therefore conclude that the Amhurst partners are entitled to claim a contribution .
\tI would add this .
In Lloyd v. Grace Smith Lord Macnaghten at 738/9 referred to the incidence of insurance as relevant to his considerations .
Firms will in the ordinary course take out comprehensive insurance policies, which insure them against even the fraudulent acts of their partners: such policies do not, however, indemnify the fraudulent partner himself .
Professional firms are often required to take out such policies as a matter of their professional duties .
It would hardly be a satisfactory rule of law which rendered liability in dishonest assistance cases against a dishonest partner, when he will have no cover, but forbids vicarious liability in appropriate cases against his partners, even though they are typically insured for such liability .
Are the Amhurst partners "innocent" claimants .
\tThe next question is whether the Amhurst partners, whose liability is vicarious rather than personal, can present themselves for the purpose of their Contribution Act claim as innocents, or whether they must present themselves in the same light as Mr Amhurst himself .
\tThe Amhurst partners submit that they are entitled to a full indemnity, because they are personally innocent of any dishonesty or wrongdoing .
Examples of such full indemnities are cited,  eg  Lister v. Romford Ice and Cold Storage Company Ltd  [1957] AC 555 , where Viscount Simonds and Lord Morton thought that an alternative route under which the employer could obtain a complete indemnity from its negligent employee was under the predecessor Act, the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935 (the "Act of 1935"): see at 579/580 and 584/5 .
The Amhurst partners\' innocence was to be contrasted not only with the dishonesty of other parties, but in particular with the large receipts of such parties, which they should be made to disgorge .
It would therefore be "just and equitable" for them to recover an indemnity .
\tMr Salaam, Mr Livingstone and Mr Al Tajir submit otherwise .
They submit that the argument of the Amhurst partners is novel and unsupported by authority .
It would, if correct, enable all parties who were only vicariously liable, even in the typical case of vicarious liability for negligence, to present themselves as wholly without fault .
Lister v. Romford Ice is not to the contrary, for there the employer had a cause of action in contract for an indemnity: the employee owed his employer a contractual duty of care .
As against Mr Amhurst, therefore, the Amhurst partners might be entitled to a full indemnity, but not against Mr Salaam or the third parties .
As against them the Amhurst partners must present themselves as wrongdoers standing in the shoes of Mr Amhurst: for it is only because they stand in his shoes that they are entitled to a contribution in the first place .
That followed from a combination of the doctrine of vicarious liability itself, as a matter of construction of the Act since section 2(1) was dealing with responsibility "for the damage in question" for which the claimant was a "person liable" under section 1, and by reason of the doctrine of attribution whereby the knowledge and therefore dishonesty of Mr Amhurst was to be attributed to the Amhurst partners .
\tIn my judgment, each of these opposing submissions has something in it .
It appears that it may be correct that in the ordinary case of vicarious liability for negligence, the employer stands fully in the shoes of his employee .
Thus in the leading textbook on the Act of 1935, GLANVILLE WILLIAMS, Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence, 1951, there is the following passage at 166/7: "Where a tort is committed concurrently by D1 and D2, and D2 is acting on behalf of D3, who is vicariously liable for him, it is submitted that D3 is vicariously liable to D1 for the contribution payable by D2 to D1 .
Thus if the negligence of D1 and D2 was equal, D1 should be given judgment for contribution in respect of the 50 per cent of the plaintiff\'s judgment against D2 and D3 jointly .
at the same time , D3 should be given indemnity against D2 in respect of any contribution that he thus has to pay to D1. .
To similar effect is ATIYAH on Vicarious Liability at 430/1: "In other words, in deciding what is "just and equitable"...as between D1 and D3 the court must have regard to D3\'s responsibility for the negligence of D2. .
\tLister v. Romford Ice and other such cases are not inconsistent with that, for in such cases there is a right to an indemnity outside the Act itself .
Indeed, Viscount Simonds at 580 said that if the employer could not recover damages for breach of contract, he was precluded from obtaining contribution .
Only Lord Morton, approving the decision at first instance, said that there was a right to obtain contribution, which in the judge\'s discretion could be a full indemnity, even in the absence of a claim in contract .
That may well be correct in a two party case, where the issue of contribution is solely between the negligent employee and the vicariously liable employer: see GLANVILLE WILLIAMS at 162 .
It does not follow that it is equally correct in a multi-party case, such as discussed by Professors Williams and Atiyah above, where the vicariously liable defendant seeks a contribution from someone other than his employee .
Even Mr Boswood agreed that his submission would not work in cases of negligence .
\tEven in such a case, however, I am not clear in my mind that the vicariously liable claimant must be held to have the same "responsibility for the damage in question" as primary wrongdoers .
"Responsibility" has been held to cover both causative potency and blameworthiness: Madden v. Quirke [1989] 1 WLR 702 at 707E, Downs v. Chappell  [1997] 1 WLR 426  at 445H .
I can quite see that in terms of causative potency the vicariously liable probably has to stand in the shoes of the wrongdoer .
It does not seem to me to follow that he must necessarily do so in terms of blameworthiness .
\tWhether that be so or not in the case of negligence, however, it does seem to me that the case of dishonesty is different .
It would in my judgment be unjust if the defendant who was vicariously liable for his employee\'s fraud could not have his personal innocence of dishonesty count in his favour .
There is nothing in section 2(1) of the Act to suggest otherwise .
The vicariously liable bears the fault of the party for whom he is liable; but at the same time he is entitled to invoke his own innocence of dishonesty .
My conclusion, therefore, is that ultimately it is for the Court to attempt, under the broad discretion given to it by the statutory language of "just and equitable", to reconcile all these factors in its assessment of contribution .
\tI do not think that there is anything in the doctrines of vicarious liability or of attribution, or in the construction of the Act, to require a different answer .
As between a plaintiff and an employer, the doctrine of vicarious liability requires a full recovery, based on concepts of agency and the policy considerations expressed in Holt CJ\'s dictum .
As between persons liable for the same damage, however, between whom there is no cause of action other than a right of contribution under the Act, it does not seem to me to follow that the doctrine of vicarious liability necessarily operates in the same way .
As for the doctrine of attribution, I do not think that that applies at all, other than in the sense of a reference under another name to the doctrine of vicarious liability: the Amhurst partners are not liable to Dubal because Mr Amhurst\'s assumed dishonesty is attributed personally to them, but only vicariously .
In such circumstances it would be odd if his dishonesty had to be personally attributed to his partners for the first time at the stage of contribution .
If that could happen at all, it could only be so because of the demands of the Act itself, creating a special rule of attribution: see Meridian Global Funds Management Asia Ltd v. Securities Commission  [1995] 2 AC 500  at 507B/F .
However, I reject the submission that the Act itself requires the merely vicariously liable to have attributed to them the dishonesty of their agent for the purposes of contribution .
Section 1 deals with entitlement to contribution, which depends on a person\'s liability for the damage in question .
Section 2 deals with the assessment of contribution, which does not turn on that person\'s liability, for that has already been established, but on his responsibility for the damage in question: and that responsibility does not equate to the rule of law which has required liability, such as vicarious liability, but on an exercise of discretion, the finding of what is just and equitable .
It is to that exercise that I now turn .
"Just and equitable" .
\tThe parties\' submissions were as follows .
\tMr Salaam submitted that each of the parties should contribute equally .
Since Mr Livingstone had already paid (at least) 20% of the claim, there should be no further contribution from him, even if the Amhurst partners were entitled to some recovery .
The effect of that submission would be to leave Mr Salaam in possession of some of his receipts .
\tMr Livingstone, who claimed no contribution from anyone, also submitted that he had paid enough; that the Amhurst partners were not entitled to any contribution, and could in any event have obtained their recovery from Mr Amhurst himself; and that to ensure that Mr Al Tajir did not retain any of his receipts, he should be made to contribute to Mr Salaam, and, if the court felt after all that the Amhurst partners were entitled to anything, to the Amhurst partners .
That was before the Al Tajir settlement .
Following that settlement, Mr Livingstone now submitted that it should be Mr Salaam who should make any necessary contribution to the Amhurst partners, so as to prevent Mr Salaam from retaining any of his benefits .
Implicitly, therefore, it was accepted that Mr Al Tajir had contributed enough through his settlement .
\tMr Al Tajir submitted that only causative potency really distinguished the parties: and that on that score, the principal players were Mr Livingstone, Mr Salaam and Richco, that Mr Amhurst came next, and that he himself brought up the rear, since he was not involved in the drafting of the agreements, and was unaware of the subsidiary agreements and their detailed provisions such as the mobilisation fee and the monthly payments .
He relied on Downs v. Chappell as being inconsistent with a receipts based approach .
Following his settlement, he submitted that what has satisfied Dubal should be enough, and that in any event the Amhurst partners should not be awarded anything, since their settlement was modest compared with Mr Amhurst\'s responsibility .
\tMr Amhurst, who apart from Mr Al Tajir\'s contingent claim faced a claim only from Mr Salaam, submitted that the primary consideration in justice was that Mr Salaam should obtain no contribution until he had at least been required to disgorge what he had received .
In any event Mr Amhurst\'s responsibility was less than those of the others, both because he had received nothing, and was therefore less blameworthy, and also because his participation had less causative potency since the scheme would have gone ahead without him .
He was also less blameworthy, and in particular vis-a-vis Mr Salaam, in that he was Mr Salaam\'s agent and it was Mr Salaam who as principal was giving him instructions .
The Amhurst partners therefore should not be obliged to contribute to Mr Salaam either, but on the contrary should receive a full indemnity from those who had benefitted from the scheme .
Mr Leggatt further submitted on his behalf that Mr Amhurst, as a solicitor, had already paid a high price because of this litigation in a way that went beyond the damage done to businessmen such as Mr Salaam, and that an order for contribution would face him with the prospect of ruin .
\tThe Amhurst partners also submitted that the court\'s first duty was to ensure that Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir should retain none of their receipts .
That could only be achieved by giving the Amhurst partners a complete indemnity from their contributions .
I think that they were keener to obtain their indemnity from Mr Al Tajir than from Mr Salaam because they trusted his credit further: in any event they submitted that any order for contribution should be made against the parties held liable on a joint and several basis, so that the risk of insolvency should not fall on themselves .
Following the Al Tajir settlement they submitted that interest considerations showed that Mr Al Tajir had not yet disgorged his full receipts: they calculated that he would still retain over $8,000,000 .
Therefore they continued to submit that he should be required to indemnify them in full .
Even if as a result he paid out more than he had received, that was not something of which he could complain against them: whereas he had settled with Dubal even though Dubal had not sued him, they at least had sued him for a contribution .
\tRichco, which at the time faced a claim only from Mr Salaam, emphasised that its role had not been that of a promoter, that it had given Dubal considerable relief under its settlement agreements, and that its receipts had been in theory limited to 0.5% of the fee on sales, some $8,500,000, and in practice had been at most $366,678 .
If it should contribute at all, it should only be after Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir had disgorged everything .
Mr Livingstone, on the other hand, had paid enough .
It suggested that the Amhurst partners should receive a complete indemnity from Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir, and that even after that Dubal\'s claim would be met in full before those two had completely disgorged their receipts .
Richco should therefore be required to contribute nothing .
\tIn summary, therefore, no one suggested that Mr Livingstone should contribute, not even, at the end of the day, the Amhurst partners who were the only party to have claimed a contribution from him .
Everyone save for Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir thought that the Amhurst partners should receive an indemnity .
Richco and Mr Amhurst were on Mr Salaam\'s list as essentially equal partners .
\tI have taken account of all these submissions and looked at the matter from various points of view .
To mention matters chronologically, I have considered the parties\' responsibility for setting up the scheme in the first place, and to a lesser extent their responsibility for administering it .
Secondly, I have had regard to the parties\' receipts under the scheme .
Thirdly I have considered the parties\' attitude to Dubal\'s attempts to recoup its loss .
That loss was of course increasing as time went by .
\tIn terms of the promotion, organisation and operation of the scheme, I think that there is little to choose between the five principal parties .
I regard Mr Livingstone, Mr Al Tajir and Mr Salaam as in effect three partners, each of whom brought something indispensable to the scheme .
I have remarked above that the concept of the alliance with Richco probably came from Mr Livingstone, or at any rate developed out of his conversations and discussions with Mr Al Tajir and/or Mr Salaam .
It is clear, however, that each had need of the other; and the fact that the original split of 40%/30%30% was roughly equal, favouring Mr Al Tajir slightly perhaps for no better reason than that he had the greatest influence in the world of business, supports my assessment .
As it was, after his initial involvement, he appears to have left the organisation and operation of the scheme to his two partners .
They were then able to negotiate extra payments, such as the mobilisation fee and the monthly $85,000, which I do not think Mr Al Tajir even knew anything about .
\tRichco was not an originator, but it was a necessary part of the scheme, and was prepared to lend itself to the sham transactions, not only for the sake of its anticipated earnings under the scheme itself, at least 20% of the fee on sales, but also no doubt because it had other expectations of the alliance .
Indeed, it was only willing to reduce its demands from 1.25% of the fee to at least 0.5% on the basis that the ASA would be put in place, out of the operation of which the beneficiaries under the subsidiary agreements could earn per tonne commissions .
In any event, playing paymaster to the others was, as Mr Amhurst explained, the key to business with Dubal and in Dubai .
\tFinally, Mr Amhurst was not a principal, nor an originator, but in his own way he was a necessary part of the setting up of the scheme, and he lent by his presence a colourable respectability to it .
It is submitted that if it had not been him, it would have been someone else .
That may not have been easily arranged, however .
He was obviously a close associate of Salaam .
He was a solicitor, which in the assumed circumstances must count against him .
I regard his responsibility in the promotion, organisation and operation of the scheme as being a little less than that of the others, but not by very much .
\tI come next to net receipts, which I have identified above .
Of course receipts enter into the overall question of responsibility .
Mr Salaam was the biggest beneficiary, keeping $20,338,348 .
Next to him came Mr Al Tajir, at $16,466,699 .
Mr Livingstone received $6,327,918 .
Richco retained nothing, and Mr Amhurst received nothing .
In percentage terms Mr Salaam got some 47% of those receipts, Mr Al Tajir some 38%, and Mr Livingstone some 15% .
\tThirdly, there is the question of how well the parties behaved subsequently .
Richco was the earliest to come to terms, and entered into a first settlement agreement in April 1993, as part of which the Richco consultancy agreement was agreed to be treated as over from 22 March 1993, the date of Dubal\'s letter to Richco terminating the agreement .
That at least staunched the outflow of funds .
There was also a second settlement agreement relating to the ancillary agreements .
As late as December 1995, however, at the time of the so-called Clyde memorandum, Richco was still trying to withhold information about the full extent of Dubal\'s losses .
A little earlier in March 1995 Dubal began its proceedings against Mr Livingstone .
Given the arm-lock that Dubal had on Mr Livingstone in the form of a world-wide Mareva injunction, it may be that Mr Livingstone did not have all that much choice about what happened next: but the fact remains that Mr Livingstone decided not to defend his position, but to come to terms .
He gets the credit of that capitulation .
The settlement was designed in effect to take the greatest proportion of his assets, and produced for Dubal a recovery of nearly 23% of its claim .
\tI come next to these proceedings .
That has led to the Amhurst settlement, which has produced another 13.5% for Dubal .
Mr Al Tajir was not, of course, a defendant .
Ill-health saved him from entering the witness box; and he has now come to terms in a settlement which has produced some 23% more of Dubal\'s claim with interest .
Mr Salaam was the last to settle .
I wrote in my draft judgment that he had been "defiant to the end" .
That was justified on my knowledge at that time .
Shortly thereafter, of course, I learned of his settlement, and also that $3,000,000 had already been paid on 2 April 1998 .
It may be, therefore, that my original assessment was too harsh, but I do not think by very much .
I bear in mind that, at the request of all the parties, this judgment was twice delayed to give Dubal and Mr Salaam a full opportunity to reach a settlement .
\tTaking all these matters together, I think that  prima facie  a fair allocation between these five parties would be Mr Salaam 36%, Mr Al Tajir 29%, Mr Livingstone 15%, Richco 10% and Mr Amhurst 10% .
That, however, has to be checked against four further factors .
The first is the structure of the contribution proceedings: not everyone was claiming against the other .
The second is of course the matter of settlements already made .
The third is the important matter of receipts, for I agree with what Ferris J said in K v. P, that it cannot be just and equitable to require one party to contribute in a way which would leave another party in possession of his spoils .
I do not regard Downs v. Chappell as being inconsistent with that approach .
The case merely demonstrates that the greater causative potency of the merely negligent may balance the greater blameworthiness of the dishonest .
\tThe fourth consideration is the risk of insolvency .
It has been recognised that insolvency is to be taken account in assessing contribution .
Thus the insolvency of one defendant may mean that other defendants must bear a larger contribution: see Fisher v. CHT Ltd [1966] 2 QB 475 at 480G/481A per Lord Denning MR .
There is no  firm  evidence before me as to the  present  means of any of the parties, with the exception of Mr Livingstone .
Mr Al Tajir has a reputation as an extremely wealthy man, and I have received  evidence from him himself as to his huge income in earlier days .
His settlement with Dubal suggests that he is still wealthy, but in need or at any rate desirous of the technique of paying by instalments .
Mr Salaam has also given evidence before me of very considerable wealth in earlier days, but has hinted bitterly at the ravages that the bringing of these proceedings has caused .
There is obviously concern before me as to his ability to withstand the large liabilities that he faces .
However, he has already paid $9,000,000, is due to pay a further $3,000,000 before the end of August, and otherwise, like Mr Al Tajir, is given until the end of 1999 for the final instalment of $6,000,000 .
It is submitted that, in the light of his greater liability and responsibility as indicated in my draft judgment, his settlement suggests that he is already at the limit of his financial capabilities .
I do not think, however that I have sufficient reason to view Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir as being in materially different circumstances .
Submissions on behalf of Mr Amhurst suggest that he faces ruin if a substantial award was made against him, and the fact that he has not contributed to the settlement may possibly support those submissions .
\tI will now consider each party in turn, taking these factors into account .
Mr Livingstone .
I can eliminate Mr Livingstone straightaway, for no one actively sought any further contribution from him, not even the Amhurst defendants who had claimed it on the pleadings .
In any event, Mr Livingstone has already paid nearly 23% of the claim, which is more than my assessment of 15%, and more than his receipts of about 15% .
Mr Salaam .
His liability, which I had to assess for the purposes of my draft judgment, has now been superseded by the Salaam settlement .
I have calculated that as representing a baseline $11,422,506 or some 22.8% of Dubal\'s original claim, whereas his receipts amounted to $20,338,348, which is some 41% of the original claim, and I have assessed his prima facie responsibility at 36% .
\tAt 36%, Mr Salaam should prima facie contribute a baseline $18,042,343, which is some $6.6m more than the baseline value of his settlement, and his receipts are still greater .
It follows that there is prima facie no reason why he should obtain a contribution from anyone else before he has disgorged those receipts .
I do not regard the size or terms of his settlement with Dubal as preventing me from ordering him to make further contribution, although it is something of which I must obviously take note .
Mr Salaam should in justice therefore be prepared to contribute up to the balance of his receipts .
As at 31 December 1997 his receipts, with interest added, amounted to $30,202,446 ($20,338,348 x 148.5%) .
His settlement as at the same date has been assessed at $16,962,422 .
Therefore, Mr Salaam could in theory contribute some $13,000,000, before exhausting his receipts .
Mr Al Tajir .
He has agreed a settlement which represents a baseline payment of $11,394,985 or some 22.7% of Dubal\'s original claim .
He received, however, $16,466,669, or nearly 33%; and I have assessed his prima facie responsibility at 29% .
As in the case of Mr Salaam, so in his case too, I do not regard the size or terms of his settlement as preventing me from ordering him to make further contribution, although again it is something of which I take note .
Mr Al Tajir should in justice therefore be prepared to contribute up to the balance of his receipts .
As at 31 December 1997 his receipts, with interest added, amounted to $24,453,003 ($16,466,669 x 148.5%) .
His settlement as at the same date has been assessed at $16, 921,554 .
Therefore, Mr Al Tajir could also in theory contribute some $7,500,000, before exhausting his receipts .
\tTo whom, if anyone, should such contribution be provided .
There is in effect only one candidate still in the field, the Amhurst partners .
The only reason why Mr Al Tajir might contribute to Mr Salaam (there is no claim in the opposite direction) is if Mr Salaam was required to pay to the Amhurst partners more than what I would assess to be his several contribution, ie because of a joint and several liability to the Amhurst partners .
The latter claim $10,000,000 as at end November 1997 .
Mr Salaam could by himself contribute up to a full indemnity to the Amhurst partners  out of his receipts, whereas Mr Al Tajir could contribute some 75% of the Amhurst partners\' claim out of his receipts .
\tIndeed, as a result of the Salaam settlement, it became apparent that  there was more than enough left in the receipts of Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir, when the value of those receipts including interest over the years was taken into account, to fund a complete indemnity of the Amhurst partners .
At the final hearing which took place after that settlement, it was therefore accepted that I would follow the ruling that I had already given in my draft judgment to the effect that I would in such a situation give to the Amhurst partners a full indemnity .
There were, however, at that time and in ensuing written argument, competing submissions as to how Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir should respectively fund that indemnity .
I shall visit that particular issue below .
Mr Amhurst .
In one sense he has contributed nothing, and in another, through the Amhurst settlement, he has already contributed approximately 13.5% of the claim, against my assessment of 10% and nil receipts .
Therefore, it seems to me that unless I order contribution in favour of the Amhurst partners, he should make no further contribution .
I will therefore have to return to Mr Amhurst in due course .
The Amhurst partners .
In my judgment they are neither bound by Mr Amhurst\'s assessed responsibility at 10%, nor automatically entitled to a full indemnity, other than from Mr Amhurst himself, against whom they have made no claim .
[23]  They have, however, contributed approximately 13.5%, which is 3.5% more than my prima facie allocation of Mr Amhurst\'s responsibility .
They are therefore in any event entitled to recover that additional 3.5% .
\tMore than that, however, it seems to me that a combination of their personal innocence of any dishonesty coupled with the dishonesty of parties such as Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir who have not yet disgorged their full receipts means that they should receive a full indemnity from such parties .
As I wrote in my draft judgment before the Salaam settlement and the further submissions regarding interest rates, if, as then seemed possible, Mr Salaam\'s liability would have exceeded not only my assessment of his prima facie share of responsibility but also his receipts, I would have limited the Amhurst partners\' recovery by reference to the level of Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Al Tajir\'s undisgorged receipts .
As it is however, by the same logic, as I made clear at that time, if there had been sufficient sums left in the hand of Mr Salaam and/or Mr Al Tajir, I would have been prepared to grant the Amhurst partners a full indemnity .
It now appears, as set out above, that Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Al Tajir\'s undisgorged receipts well exceed the Amhurst partners\' claim, and in my judgment that claim should succeed in full .
\tThe remaining questions are how that liability to indemnify the Amhurst partners should be split between Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir; whether their liability should be joint or several; and whether to make any order for contribution against Mr Amhurst .
The split of Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Al Tajir\'s liability to indemnify the Amhurst partners .
The first question is in what proportion I should order Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir to indemnify the Amhurst partners .
One possible solution is to employ my respective prima facie assessments of their responsibility and thus to order their contribution in a proportion which reflects Mr Salaam\'s 36% and Mr Al Tajir\'s 29% .
That would mean that Mr Salaam would contribute approximately 6 parts to Mr Al Tajir\'s 5 parts, or $5,535,714 to Mr Al Tajir\'s $4,464,286 .
At a time when I had mistakenly thought that the period limited for Mr Al Tajir to respond in writing to previous submissions had expired without him utilising that opportunity - in fact his written submissions had been served in time but had not reached me - I gave an informal indication to the parties that I would adopt that solution .
\tFollowing Mr Al Tajir\'s written submissions, however, to which Mr Salaam has had the opportunity to respond and has done so, it seems to me that that approach does insufficient justice to my overall approach .
On reconsideration, I think that my allocation between Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir should also take account of their respective receipts and in particular how much each of them would, in theory, be left with as a result of my orders, as well as the way in which my prima facie assessment would affect them overall in the light of their settlements .
If Mr Salaam contributed some $5.5m to the Amhurst partners, then he would still be left, as of end 1997, with some $7.5m of undisgorged receipts, whereas Mr Al Tajir, contributing some $4.5m, would be left with some $3m .
Moreover, Mr Salaam\'s overall contribution (his settlement at a baseline $11,422,506 plus his contribution to the Amhurst partners at $5,535,714 which represents a baseline $3,727,753) at a total of $15,150,259 represents a liability of only 30.2% (as against my prima facie assessment - 36%); whereas Mr Al Tajir\'s overall contribution (his settlement at $11,394,985 plus $4,464,286 which represents a baseline $3,006,253) at a total of $14,401,238 represents a liability of 28.7% (as against 29%) .
There is an imbalance there .
\tIt seems to me that a fairer allocation would be that Mr Salaam should pay the Amhurst defendants $7,500,000 and Mr Al Tajir should pay them $2,500,000 .
In that case, as of end 1997 Mr Salaam would be left with some $5.5m of his receipts (including interest on them), while Mr Al Tajir would be left with some $5m on the same basis .
Moreover, Mr Salaam\'s overall contribution (his settlement at a baseline of $11,422,506 plus a baseline $5,050,505 in respect of his $7.5m contribution to the Amhurst partners) would be $16,473,011 or 32.9%, whereas Mr Al Tajir\'s overall contribution on the same basis would be $13,078,486 or 26.1% .
Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir: joint or several liability to contribute .
The question has been raised whether such orders should be joint and several or several .
In my judgment, this question should depend on the rationale of the order for contribution .
If, as at one time seemed the case, it would have been only Mr Al Tajir who would be left with undisgorged receipts either at all or of any size, then it would have been wrong to ask Mr Salaam to guarantee Mr Al Tajir\'s solvency .
As it is, however, both these parties have been left with substantial undisgorged receipts, even after the contribution orders which I am making in favour of the Amhurst partners .
In the circumstances, I do not see why the Amhurst partners should take the risk of either Mr Salaam or Mr Al Tajir proving to be insolvent as long as the other of them is left with undisgorged receipts .
Mr Salaam should therefore be jointly liable with Mr Al Tajir in respect of Mr Al Tajir\'s several liability to contribute $2,500,000, and Mr Al Tajir should be jointly liable with Mr Salaam, but only up to a maximum of $5,000,000, in respect of Mr Salaam\'s several liability to contribute $7,500,000 .
It follows that if both Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir are solvent, then they will contribute to the Amhurst partners $7,500,000 and $2,500,000 respectively .
If, however, Mr Al Tajir proves to be insolvent and Mr Salaam solvent, then Mr Salaam may find himself having to shoulder the whole $10,000,000 - but even that would not exhaust his receipts .
If, on the other hand, Mr Salaam proves to be insolvent and Mr Al Tajir solvent, then Mr Al Tajir may find that he has to pay the Amhurst partners a total of $7,500,000, thereby more or less exhausting his receipts .
Mr Amhurst, revisited  .
I have to consider whether to make any order for contribution against Mr Amhurst in the light of the fact that Mr Al Tajir\'s contingent claim has come into effect, and there also remains Mr Salaam\'s claim .
The Amhurst partners will recover their settlement through my orders in their favour against Mr Salaam and Mr Al Tajir .
In the circumstances, on balance nothing will turn out to have been paid in respect of Mr Amhurst\'s prima facie 10% responsibility .
It has not been submitted on Mr Amhurst\'s behalf that I am not entitled to make an order against him under the Act merely on the basis of his assumed liability .
I am unsure that I am entitled to do so: section 1(4) operates in favour of the defendant who has settled, but not expressly against him .
However, it is understandable that Mr Amhurst, who has settled the claim by Dubal against him, does not wish to keep alive the question of that claim merely for the purpose of the contribution proceedings and is therefore prepared to face contribution on the basis of his assumed liability .
Although Mr Salaam was Mr Amhurst\'s principal, Mr Amhurst was also in a sense Mr Salaam\'s collaborator, and had been so over a long period of time, going back to the times of the GRC agreement .
He had also been a director of some of Mr Salaam\'s companies .
He had earned fees from his work for Mr Salaam .
He owed a duty to Mr Salaam to advise him as to his responsibilities .
On this basis, it would have seemed to me that it would be just and equitable to order Mr Amhurst to pay a contribution to Mr Salaam, provided the effect of it was not to leave Mr Salaam with any of his receipts .
As it is, however, even if Mr Salaam pays a full indemnity to the Amhurst partners, that would not exhaust his receipts .
In the circumstances, there will be no contribution from Mr Amhurst to Mr Salaam .
Nor will I order a contribution in favour of Mr Al Tajir .
The effect of that would merely be to restore to Mr Al Tajir a portion of the benefits which he has been made to disgorge .
Richco .
Mr Salaam has withdrawn his claim for a contribution against Richco .
As it was, I had assessed its prima facie responsibility at 10% .
The contribution it had already made through its settlement agreements cannot be quantified, but I was prepared to infer that it had been substantial .
It had certainly assisted Dubal considerably in bringing these proceedings .
I would also have borne in mind that any award I might have made against it was perhaps (but only perhaps) recoverable by it from Dubal under its indemnity arrangement .
Only Mr Salaam had claimed against it .
In all these circumstances I would in any event have made no order for contribution against it .
Note 1\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  The only somewhat hesitant note in that respect came from one of the third parties on whose behalf it was submitted that my findings might, if I saw fit, be expressed in part as assumptions .
I shall revert to this .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 2\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 Section 10 provides: "Where, by any wrongful act or omission of any partner acting in the ordinary course of business of the firm, or with the authority of his co-partners, loss or injury is caused to any person not being a partner of the firm, or any penalty is incurred, the firm is liable therefor to the same extent as the partner so acting or omitting to act. .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 3\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 Day 1, page 75: "...I should make clear that the Plaintiff\'s case is that although Mr Al Tajir was involved in the scheme to take the money from Dubal, his involvement was, and was to the knowledge of Mr Salaam and Mr Amhurst, that of another villain .
He was, as it were, the get-away driver of this robbery .
He was not standing there as a policeman, in front of whom the drama unfolded, and whose nod and wink or failure to intervene could be interpreted as indicating that what was being done was lawful. .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 4\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 I simplify somewhat: thus any surplus above 80% generated by the $2s was to be carried forward to be available in future years to fund future deficits below 80% or ultimately to be shared at the end of the contract 50/50 between Richco and JMS .
Moreover, the $2s were only to be available to JMS after an initial $1,000,000 excess had been generated for Clarendon\'s account: but that $1,000,000 was to be paid out to Valo under clause 6(ii) of the Valo contract, a detail I mention only here .
In effect, under these compensatory arrangements, JMS/Valo were taking the theoretical risk that the $5s and the $2s would not generate sufficient funds to make good the whole of the difference between 50% and 80% of the 2.5% fee on sales .
In practice, however, no one has suggested that the risk was other than immaterial .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 5\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  John Duke Anthony, Arab States of the Lower Gulf: People, Politics, Petroleum, Washington DC The Middle East Institute, 1975, at pp 154/5 .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 6\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 Originally 1.5%, but increased by amendment in December 1981 .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 7\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  No office was ever opened .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 8\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  Mr Amhurst had previously given instructions to Richco on behalf of JMS and Valo on 8 January 1988 to the effect all sums due under the JMS and Valo agreements should be sent to an account at the Fidelity Bank, London .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 9\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 A subsequent change reduced Mr Salaam\'s share to 22.5% .
In effect Saad\'s share came solely from Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone: see footnote 9 below .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 10\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  At first, that agreement appears to have been operated in such a way that Saad Salaam got 15%, and the other three participants received respectively 40%/30%/30% of the remaining 85%, so that Mr Al Tajir received 34%, and Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone received 25.5% each .
By October 1988, however, Saad\'s 15% was coming out of Mr Salaam\'s and Mr Livingstone\'s 30%, but not out of Mr Al Tajir\'s 40%: thus Mr Al Tajir received 40%, Mr Salaam and Mr Livingstone received 22.5% each, and Saad Salaam received 15% .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 11\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  In the course of 1997 .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 12\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 Mr Strothotte thought that he had been told by Mr Rich and Mr Green that the meeting also embraced Mr Al Tajir, but he was prepared to accept that he might have been mistaken about that .
Mr Al Tajir was not at that meeting .
His name, however, is quite likely to have been mentioned in this context .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 13\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 Majlis are a form of state open house, at which anyone with business can attend for an audience .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 14\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02   The $10s were also paid up in capitalised form, but not the $55s .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 15\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  There were also capitalised payments in respect of the $10s in the sums totalling $2,942,500 to Al Tajir Ltd, and $2,942,500 to Utary .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 16\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  This is the figure pleaded in Dubal\'s points of claim and also endorsed by Mr Horat\'s appendix 3, where he seeks to summarise receipts, recipient by recipient .
It is also the figure accepted by me in my Unreasoned Findings .
On reflection, it seems to me that it may be more accurate to say that Nillet received  36  monthly payments, totalling $3,060,000 .
In the end, however, it makes no difference, because the additional $85,000 is either properly to be attributed to Nillet, or, as Dubal\'s points of claim and Mr Horat\'s appendix 3 have recorded it, to Mr Salaam personally at Bank fur Handel .
I shall for the sake of convenience adopt the latter formulation .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 17\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  In my Unreasoned Findings, I found that JMS had received $14,272,846.61 .
This, however, was to ignore the fact that $6,001,861.28 of that amount was credited to Saad Salaam\'s account at Banque Gutzwiller .
Again, the point is of little consequence, because it matters not whether Saad Salaam\'s receipts are to be deducted from those attributed to JMS, or from those attributed to Mr Salaam in general, in circumstances where he is to be regarded, as he accepts, as receiving not only what he received into his personal accounts but also what his companies received .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 18\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  As a matter of strict arithmetic, this figure should probably be $21,846,288.33, some $200 less than the figure given in the text above .
In my Unreasoned Findings, however, I cited the higher figure for Mr Salaam\'s total receipts of $21,846,488.39 .
I obtained that figure from para 6 of Mr Davis\' Outline Closing Submissions on behalf of the Salaam defendants, citing Mr Neal\'s report at para 12 .
The difference of $200 is not likely to be material .
As an agreed figure, it seems to me to be the one that I should remain with.\r\n \xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 19\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02   On behalf of Mr Al Tajir it was submitted that he had only received, in relation to the Richco consultancy agreement, the sums of $4,148,771 in respect of his share of the 2.5% commission and of $6,187,200 in respect of the capitalised buy-out of his share of the 2.5% commission .
That submission, however, ignored the further payments he received, both the quarterly payments and the capitalised payments in respect of the $5s and $2s totalling $5,268,906 .
They appear to have been ignored on the ground that they related to the ASA and were paid by Clarendon .
I have, however, already given my reasons for regarding these payments as part and parcel of the benefits of the scheme in relation to the Richco consultancy agreement .
They were written into the subsidiary agreements .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 20\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 Subject to the point mentioned below in the context of the contribution proceedings that some of the monies passed through Mr Salaam\'s hands to other parties .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 21\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 As stated above, the Salaam defendants dropped their contribution claim against Richco at the time of the Salaam settlement .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 22\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  Complete accuracy is impossible, and is in any event probably unnecessary .
Thus Mr Podgorney\'s tables are based on a Dubal original claim of not $50,117,622 but $50,117,505 .
In any event I am forced to work to the structure of Mr Podgorney\'s tables as being the most accurate tool I have to hand .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 23\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 They assert that they have 2 years to do so .
I make no comment about that .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back]  .
b'Mr .
Justice Carnwath:  \tOn 2nd March 1998 the Secretary of State presented a petition for the winding up of Market Wizard Systems (UK) Ltd ("the Company") in the public interest .
On 5th March the Official Receiver was appointed provisional liquidator by Harman J .
\r\n   \tBetween September 1997 and March 1998 the company had carried on business marketing and selling a computer package known as the Market Wizard Equity Options Trading System ("the System") .
The petition describes the System thus:\r\n   "The System is said to comprise a formula imprinted upon 11 computer disks and a 50-page operating manual, and requires a customer to have access to a telephone modem link and an IBM compatible computer .
In order for the System to function, daily prices and other information must be downloaded and entered by the customer, such information being provided by the company to the customer by means of the required telephone link .
The System operates by producing buy, sell or hold signals in respect of options in each of the 12 traded stocks .
These signals do not indicate the amount of stock to be bought or sold, but show the customer the current positions which should be held on that day (that is, neutral, short or long positions), and whether the customer should buy, sell or hold each stock .
The daily form sent to the customer includes a blank authorisation form which the customer may sign and date in order to pass on the instructions to his broker .
The trade is then made through the customer\'s broker who needs to be licensed and a member of LIFFE" .
\tThe System was sold to individuals at \xc2\xa37,500 and to companies at \xc2\xa315,000 .
One of the terms of the contract with customers was a 12-month "performance guarantee", under which, if a customer failed to make a profit over the year, then the company would refund the purchase price .
This was subject to the fulfilment of a number of conditions, one of which was that documentary evidence should be retained to prove that the customer followed the signals provided by the System during the 12 month period .
\r\n   \tThe company advertised and sold the System from September 1997 to March 1998 .
Interest was initially attracted from prospective purchasers by advertisements in national newspapers, which potential customers were invited to follow up by telephoning a freephone number .
They would then be sent a copy of a standard letter and a brochure describing the product and including an application form.\r\n   \tThe Secretary of State seeks the winding up of the company on five grounds:  in summary:\r\n   (1) The company\'s business requires authorisation under the Financial Services Act 1986 ("FSA") .
No authorisation has been obtained, and the company\'s business is therefore illegal .
(2) The company has made misleading/unlawful statements in its promotional literature .
(3) The company has allowed itself to be managed by Mr Robin Reichelt, an undischarged bankrupt .
(4) The company has failed to maintain adequate books, records and accounting procedures .
(5) The company appears to be insolvent .
\tThe Court\'s approach to such a "public interest" petition is well understood .
In  Walter L. Jacob and Co  [1989] BCLC 345, Nicholls LJ explained that the Court has to carry out a "balancing exercise", and that, although the Court will be assisted by the evidence and submissions of the Secretary of State, supported by the expertise of his Department, it is ultimately to the Court that Parliament has entrusted the task of evaluating the evidence and deciding whether it affords sufficient reason for making a winding up order (p 353) .
Later in the same judgment he emphasised the importance attached by Parliament to -\r\n   "......the need for the general public to be protected against the activities of unscrupulous persons who deal in securities... .
The public interest requires that individuals and companies who deal in securities to the public should maintain at least the generally accepted minimum standard of commercial behaviour, but those who, for whatever reason, fall below those standards should have their activities .
stopped .
... .
The more unusual and speculative the investment, the heavier is the burden resting on a vendor of shares to ensure that the contents and get up of his sales literature are not misleading, either as to the nature of his interest in the shares, or as to the absence of any unusual restrictions affecting the shares, or as to his connection with the company in question, or otherwise .
..." (p359) .
\tWhen making the order for a provisional liquidator, Harman J said:\r\n   "It seems to me quite unarguable, I confess, that this is a system for giving investment advice, and that that is a prohibited trade, and that consequently, the prospect of the company being wound up on the ground that it has been conducting business in an illegal manner is not only probable but highly probable .
Further, as it seems to me, it bears very directly upon the question before me whether a provisional liquidator should be appointed .
If the public are being offered advice from an illegal source, they ought to be protected from that as soon as possible, and the public interest can only be served by the prevention of any further steps to give such advice. .
History of the Market Wizard System \tThe System was originally developed for use in the Australian market by a company called Banner Trading Systems Property Limited ("Banner"), controlled by Mr Day, who gave evidence .
Mr Day is now resident in Vanuatu, and has a new family company, DMT International Limited ("DMT"), which has recently taken over the assets and activities of Banner .
The precise status of either company, and the detail of the transactions between them, are not entirely clear from the evidence before me, but are probably not material to the issues I have to decide .
There seems no reason to doubt that Mr Day, through one or other of his companies, was able to, and did, confer the necessary rights on Market Wizard UK .
\r\n   \tAccording to Mr Day - \r\n   "The programme includes a mathematical model which produces parabolas, and it is these which determine whether the price of a stock is at a high or low point" He says that the use of such parabolas to determine the future direction of market price had been in use by market forecasters in America and elsewhere over a long time, but that Banner has spent many years developing such concepts to be applied in computer trading systems .
He says: "We are confident no-one else in the world has been successful in combining parabolas and future timing points with the power of the modern desktop computer to produce a software programme which can isolate tops and bottoms of the price of a stock or commodity with such a high degree of accuracy" .
I heard no independent expert evidence from either side which would enable me to assess the validity of these claims .
\tThe Market Wizard software was conceived by Banner during 1995 and another Australian company, Compvice Property Limited was used to develop a computer software programme in accordance with the concept .
The System was introduced to the Australian market in May 1996 by Wizard Systems Australasia Pty Ltd ("WSA") .
That company had been incorporated in February 1996 .
It was initially owned jointly by Mr Day and Mr Smith (or by companies or trusts controlled by them), but in October 1996 Mr Day sold his interest to Mr Smith .
There was a so-called Sale of Equipment and Service Agreement between WSA and Banner, under which Banner sold WSA certain "equipment" and "services" relating to the Market Wizard system .
By Clause 8 (1) of that agreement Banner confirmed that the Market Wizard "computer investment software package" was the "absolute property" of WSA, which was accordingly "entitled to deal with it throughout the world as it deems fit. .
Banner undertook to provide various specified support services to "maintain the functionality of Market Wizard software and system" .
The agreement provided for fees to  be payable to Banner in accordance with the numbers of units sold.\r\n   \tIn early 1997 Mr Smith and his wife, on a visit to their daughter who was living and working in London, decided to open up a family business in London, which their daughter\'s fianc\xc3\xa9, Mr Kevin Necessian, would run .
He had worked with the Union Bank of Switzerland as a financial computer analyst .
Market Wizard Systems UK Ltd was incorporated on 9th April 1997 with the assistance of Edmund Bowen and Co, solicitors .
Because of difficulties in obtaining an extension of Mr Necessian\'s work permit to enable him to run the business, he and Mr Smith\'s daughter returned to Australia .
By this time Mr Smith had been introduced to Mr Wade, an English solicitor, and Mr Reichelt, who worked for him .
(I shall consider their role in more detail later) .
Mr Smith decided that he and his wife would run the business with their help .
The funds necessary to start the business were provided by Mr Smith, either personally or from his overseas companies .
Offices were rented at 13-14 Queen Street, Mayfair .
\r\n   \tSince Mr Smith did not have a right to permanent residence in this country, but his wife held a British passport, it was decided that she would become the sole director .
There was some dispute before me about the extent to which his wife played any active part in the management of the company .
However, I do not think it is necessary to investigate this question in detail .
It is not disputed that Mr Smith acted as shadow director, and, having heard his evidence, I have no doubt that he was in effective control of the company .
Mr Reichelt was described as "general manager"; Mr Wade as company secretary and solicitor.\r\n   \tThe only formal document relating to the money advanced by Mr Smith is a so-called "loan repayment agreement" dated 16th August 1997 made between the company and "Arecki Pty Ltd as trustee for the Wizard Systems Trust" ("The Arecki agreement") .
Arecki was described by Mr Smith as his holding trust family company .
The agreement provided as follows:\r\n   "that the funding advanced by Arecki Pty Ltd to MWS UK Ltd will be repaid on the following basis .
When the MWS UK bank account balance exceeds \xc2\xa390,000, 50% of the balance, i.e .
\xc2\xa345,000 is to be repaid to Arecki Pty Ltd  .
Further, for each additional \xc2\xa350,000, \xc2\xa310,000 is required to be repaid to Arecki Pty Ltd." \tThat was signed for Arecki by Mr Simpson, their financial controller and Mr Smith\'s main financial adviser in Australia; and for Market Wizard Systems UK Ltd by Mrs Smith .
As will become apparent, the funds advanced to the company included substantial amounts from Mr Smith himself, and from other companies controlled by him other than Arecki or Wizard Systems Trust .
There is no equivalent agreement relating to those .
\r\n   \tA brochure was prepared .
The brochure included an elaborate "simulated trading model" designed to show how use of the System between July 1996 and June 1997 could have turned an investment of \xc2\xa312,000 into a total of over \xc2\xa3150,000 .
The standard letter which accompanied the brochure commented as follows:\r\n   "Market Wizard is basically a risk management and investment trading/forecasting tool that does all the real work (technical analysis) for you .
You simply collect the rewards .
For example, using Market Wizard as your guide between 1st July 1996 and 30th June 1997, had you invested \xc2\xa312,000 in the securities exclusively monitored.... you could have earned \xc2\xa3145,056 .
Too good to be true .
Absolutely not .
Astute systems traders routinely achieve these type of returns. .
\tThe company had no authorisation to conduct investment business under the Financial Services Act 1986 .
Customers were required to sign a statement acknowledging that the company did not offer financial advice .
The brochure contains in a highlighted box the following:\r\n   "VERY IMPORTANT INFORMATION .
1 .
Wizard Systems (UK) Limited is not licensed under the Financial Services Act 1986 and is not a licensed investment adviser .
2 .
Users are not intended by Market Wizard Systems (UK) Limited to treat information derived from the software as a source of investment advice, and accordingly if you do, you do so at your own risk .
3 .
Whilst the program may assist an investor in maintaining an investment portfolio it cannot necessarily guarantee success or profits or determine an investment strategy suited to the user\'s specific needs .
4 .
Whilst every endeavour has been made to ensure that the data contained in this report is accurate in every detail no responsibility will be accepted for any errors occurring in the compilation of this report. .
\tThe company began advertising in September 1997 .
Twelve "blue-chip" stocks were selected as ones which had a high turnover of shares and were representative of each of the major sectors of the economy .
A typical advertisement offered the opportunity to earn "exceptional profits", whether the stock market was going down or up, with Wizard\'s "unique trading programme" .
It also claimed that "using the Market Wizard System Version 4 from 1st July 1996 until 30th June 1997 with a bank of \xc2\xa312,000 you could have earned \xc2\xa3145,056 by now"  .
It referred to "the security of our guarantee" .
It invited readers to telephone a given number for a "free report".\r\n   \tIn October Mr Reichelt had some discussions with Mr Cridland of Astwick and Co, with regard to the requirements of the FSA .
Astwick was authorised under the FSA and regulated by the Personal Investment Authority .
Mr Cridland was a long-standing friend and business associate of Mr Wade .
Mr Cridland\'s view was that the service offered by the company did not involve giving investment advice such as to require authorisation under the 1986 Act .
As he said:\r\n   "Our view is that the software product per se is merely an aid to enable an individual to arrive at an investment decision of their own making and this is made very clear in your company brochure where there are prominent statements that no investment advice is given or intended under the FSA 1986" (His letter of 14th October 1997) .
\tOn the other hand he considered that the advertising could be caught under the terms of section 57 of the Act, and he proposed accordingly that it should be approved by Astwick and Co. As appears for a letter from Mr Cridland dated 22nd October his advice resulted in the deletion from the advertisement of the reference to a "unique" trading programme and to the "guarantee" .
Apart from those points, advertisements after the beginning of November were in similar form to the earlier advertisements, but they included a statement that they had been approved by Astwick and Co for the purposes of section 57 of the FSA .
\r\n   \tMr Cridland also suggested a number of procedures to be put in place to show that the Company would be "complying with the spirit of the Act", including the appointment of a "compliance officer" to oversee the sales process .
On 17th October Mr Wade confirmed that he was prepared to fulfil the role of compliance officer "to oversee the sales procedures at (the Company) and to ensure compliance with the provisions of the FSA 1986 and the directions of Astwick and Co." Standard "Compliance Forms" were prepared for completion by sales staff, and checking by Mr Wade .
These were designed to ensure that customers had been questioned as to their financial ability and computer literacy, and warned of the risk of losses .
There were also "compliance meetings", attended by Mr Wade, Mr Reichelt and Mr Cridland, but not Mr or Mrs Smith .
There are minutes of such meetings on 3rd, 10th and 17th November; the minutes were kept by Mr Reichelt .
Mr Reichelt later told the DTI that these were the only meetings of which minutes were prepared although there were several other informal meetings.\r\n   \tBy the end of October, 17 sales of the System had been made to individuals for a total price of \xc2\xa3127,500 .
By January this had risen to 40 sales for a total value of \xc2\xa3300,000 .
\r\n   \tThe Department\'s enquiries began on 23rd October and their representatives interviewed Mr Reichelt and Mr Smith at the company\'s premises on 23rd, 24th and 30th October .
They also spoke to Mrs Smith on 24th October, and they obtained documents pursuant to section 447 of the Companies Act 1985 .
At that time the staff included seven sales personnel, a person manning the customer help-desk, a book keeper and a receptionist .
A second visit was made commencing on 6th January 1998 at which they interviewed Mr Reichelt, and other staff including Mr Sengupta the company\'s accountant .
They also obtained further documentation from Mr Reichelt pursuant to a second section 447 authorisation .
Neither Mr Smith nor Mrs Smith were present at this interview, both being in Australia at the time .
\r\n   \tThe company continued to trade until the appointment of a provisional liquidator on 5th March .
By that time sales of over 70 systems had been sold to the value of over \xc2\xa3400,000 .
Following his appointment, the Official Receiver wrote to each of the 76 licence holders notifying them of his appointment .
As at 16th June he had received nine responses, four of which were acknowledgements, two expressed dissatisfaction with the System or the methods by which it had been promoted, and three expressed dissatisfaction at the action taken by the DTI .
One result of the appointment of a provisional liquidator was that the company ceased to be able to provide its updating service or the daily price data .
This led to some complaints from those who were happy with the product, but were now prevented from using it as intended .
\r\n   \tThe company has produced in support of its evidence a number of letters from apparently satisfied users of the System .
For example, a Mr Wolstenhulme, who describes himself as an "Account Executive" with stockbrokers Redmayne-Bentley, says:\r\n   "Every client I have spoken to about MWS seems very happy with the System and hope they can carry on business as usual after the hearing on 8th April 1998 .
All my clients agree that they cannot understand how a computer generated system can be regarded as giving advice .
The MWS appears to be a technical analysis tool that generates signals like numerous other technical analysis systems in the UK market. .
\tAnother customer, a Mr Weatherstone, says that he has traded successfully on his own account for 28 years and has satisfied himself as to the effectiveness of the System .
He asks the High Court at least to "allow MWS to fulfil its existing customer contracts rather than allowing the DTI to create a total loss situation for all concerned" .
As the material before me stands, there is evidence of complaints from only two out of the 76 customers who have acquired the System .
I have not, however, heard evidence from either side as to how the System is viewed by brokers generally or those with expertise in this market .
\r\n   The Australian Securities Commission \tThe similar activities of WSA in Australia have been the subject of investigation by the Australia Securities commission ("ASC") .
The Australian Corporations Act 1989 section 77 defines "investment advice business" as (inter alia) "a business of advising other person about securities" .
In March 1997 the ASC issued Policy Statement 118 containing guidance relating to computer software .
This was in recognition of the "increasingly significant role" played by such products "influencing investment decision of investors, in much the same way as investment advice provided in other forms. .
In paragraph 118.31 the following is said:\r\n   "The ASC considers that persons are conducting an investment advice business within s77(1) of the law if they are in the business of providing computer software which: (a) in addition to providing purely factual information, performs interpretative functions based on pre-determined formulae and guidelines: and (b) gives users securities advice or recommendations directly or indirectly (eg buy or sell triggers). .
\tThe ASC served statutory notices on WSA in September 1996 requiring information .
This was followed by discussions of the "prescribed warnings" which would be required if the ASC was to issue a "no action" letter .
These negotiations did not proceed, apparently because the ASC was involved in other litigation in the Australian Federal Court raising similar issues .
Further statutory notices were served on WSA in December 1997 and March 1998 seeking further information, and a demonstration of the System took place at WSA\'s offices on 15th April 1998 .
According to the ASC\'s letter of 8th May, the information is currently being reviewed.\r\n   \tMr Day and Mr Smith had previously been involved in an ASC investigation with a company called Multivest System Pty Ltd, which offered computerised systems for trading in futures .
This had led in July 1996 to them consenting, without admission of liability, to orders banning them from acting as representatives of futures brokers or advisers for three years .
\r\n   SIB guidance \tPrior to the formation of the Financial Services Authority, the Securities and Investments Board ("SIB") was the body principally responsible for administering the FSA in this country  .
The Chief Executive\'s Annual Report for 1996/7 referred to the subject of "computerised trading systems" and said this:\r\n   "The increasing availability of computerised trading systems causes us some concern .
Various software packages have been launched, offering the user the opportunity to analyse market data with a view to making informed investment decisions .
Where such systems offer solely analysis and verification of historical data, they are unlikely to fall within the FSA .
Some have, however, gone further in providing automatic trading signals .
Such a service is liable to constitute provision of investment advice; we have therefore acted to ensure that persons offering such services become authorised or cease business .
\tConsistent with that approach, I was shown a draft of a letter which SIB has used to respond to enquiries from people offering "technical analysis" .
One such letter states:\r\n   "In SIB\'s view pure technical analysis insofar as it relates to the ability to verify past trends through analysing historical data will not be likely to amount to investment advice .
However, where a person uses a technical analysis method to produce investment advice then that person will require authorisation or exemption under the Act if he provides that advice to third parties .
By way of example technical analysis techniques may be used as a basis for providing investment advice in the following circumstances:- (a) where a person provides means (often by way of the provision of software services) whereby historical trends and data can be used either to predict future performance of particular investments or to generate buy, sell or hold signals or recommendations; (b) where a person providing charts/graphs or means to produce charts/graphs gives added value by commentating on the signals which the charts/graphs may be giving and those comments/signals relate to the question as to whether or not particular investments should be bought, sold or held on to. .
\tThese statements of course do not purport to offer authoritative guidance as to the interpretation of the statute, which is a matter for the Court .
They do, however, indicate that the problem is one of some general importance, on which it may not be easy to draw clear-cut distinctions .
I am told that this is the first case in which the issue has come for decision in the higher courts either in this country or Australia .
\r\n   Unauthorised advice \tBy section 3 of FSA 1986 the carrying on of "investment business" is prohibited other than by "an authorised person" .
"Investment business" is defined by section 1(2) as: \r\n   "the business of engaging in one or more of the activities which fall within the paragraphs in Part II of (Schedule 1) and are not excluded by Part III of that Schedule" .
Paragraph 15 of Schedule 1 Part II is as follows: "Giving, offering or agreeing to give, to persons in their capacity as investors or potential investors advice on the merits of their purchasing, selling, subscribing for or underwriting an investment, or exercising any right conferred by an investment to acquire, to dispose of, underwrite or convert an investment" \tThere is no doubt that the options which are the subject matter of the System are investments as defined (Schedule 1 Part I) .
None of the exclusions in Part III is relevant .
The issue is whether the company is giving or offering advice within the meaning of paragraph 15 .
\r\n   \tLike Harman J, I have no doubt that the signals generated by the use of the System constitute the kind of advice with which paragraph 15 is concerned .
The signals provide guidance as to the course of action which the user should take in relation to the buying or selling of the investments .
Such guidance, in the ordinary use of English, is "advice on the merits" of purchasing those investments .
It matters not that the user is free to follow or disregard the advice; nor that he may receive further advice from his broker before making a final decision .
The brochure itself describes what is offered as "critical guidance when you need to make intelligent, disciplined trading decision..." .
Similarly, the user manual (p3) describes Market Wizard as a "computerised trading tool" that "generates detailed trading advice for a specific range of exchange traded securities. .
Those appear to be entirely accurate descriptions of what the programme purports to do .
\r\n   \tMr Ashe, for the company, submitted that the System is "simply a matter of calculation based on historical data and the updates put in by the customer. .
He described it as "a sophisticated and technologically based \'calculator\'" .
This submission would have some substance if all the programme purported to do was to provide a convenient means of extracting and analysing data as to historical movements in the market, without offering any interpretation of that information as a guide to future action .
But such a limited function would be quite inconsistent with the sense of the brochure and the evidence of Mr Day .
The whole purpose of the programme, as explained by Mr Day, is to reproduce in computer programme form the concepts developed by "legendary market forecasters" relating to "the use of parabolas in determining the future direction of market price" .
The part of the brochure dealing with the "guarantee" describes the System as "a medium to long term investment strategy" .
To qualify for the guarantee the user has to show that he has followed the signals provided by the programme during the 12 month period .
That requirement can only make sense if the signals are intended to guide the strategy .
\r\n   \tIt is to be noted that the Act requires that the advice should be on the merits of purchasing "an investment" .
General advice on the merits of a category of investment, for example on the merits of investment trusts as opposed to unit trusts, is not caught .
By contrast the System in this case gives specific signals directed to the merits of buying or selling options in each of the 12 selected companies .
Mr Ashe did not seek to argue that the mere fact that the user has to select a particular option series for the selected stock makes any difference .
Nor in my view does it make any difference that the purchaser is warned that what he is receiving is not intended to be treated as investment advice .
If, on an objective view, it is investment advice within the meaning of the statute, the agreement of the parties cannot make it something different .
\r\n   \tThe only arguable issue, in my view, is whether it is the company which is "giving or offering to give" the advice .
Mr Ashe submits that the words of paragraph 15 do not naturally apply to someone who simply sells a software programme which may be used by the purchaser to generate advice .
The only time at which any advice is given on the merits of a particular investment is at the point at which the user generates a signal .
At that point the company does nothing .
Conversely, at the time the company sells the programme, it is not advising on the merits of any particular investment, but simply putting in place a system which the customer can use to obtain such advice .
Mr Ashe further submits that it would be wrong to stretch the wording of what is a penal statute to cover something which is not naturally within it .
If the Secretary of State wishes to control such activities, he should exercise his powers under section 2 of the FSA to extend the scope of the activities that are to constitute the carrying on of investment business .
\r\n   \tMr Ashe even went further and suggested that the advice being given was not the responsibility of the Company at all, but that of Banner, which developed the System .
I cannot accept that proposition .
It is quite contrary to the basis on which the programme is marketed, as shown by the brochure .
The brochure strongly emphasises that it is the Company whose expertise lies behind the efficacy of the System .
Thus, it claims, "the Market Wizard system is a new product based on existing international experience that we have brought to London...";  "Market Wizard System UK Ltd specialises exclusively in developing and distributing next generation Financial Trading Software"; and "as a market leader our international group delivers innovative trading technologies of the highest calibre to some of the world\'s top traders" .
Clearly the company presents itself to potential customers as providing the expertise which underlies the advice .
It cannot compare itself to a mere retailer selling computer software .
\r\n   \tIn any event I think Mr Ashe\'s analysis of paragraph 15 is too narrow .
The question is whether the company is carrying on the business of giving advice .
It is not necessary to identify a particular point in time at which the advice is given .
It is enough, in my view, that it is providing the customer with a medium by which its purported expertise in the analysis of historical trading patterns is communicated in the form of advice related to a particular investment .
If the programme were being operated by the company itself to produce the signals, in response to specific requests from customers, there would be no doubt that it was the company which was providing the advice .
The fact that it is the customer who is operating the programme does not change the nature of the advice or its source .
\r\n   \tThis direct link between the company and the ultimate advice is also reinforced by the daily Internet communication with the company .
As the user manual describes it, \r\n   "daily update information, system updates and upgrades are sent to the user\'s e-mail address, creating a very efficient, prompt and cheap method of communication. .
The "daily information bulletin" includes not simply market information but also so-called "security lock data" .
The evidence before me did not explain the precise content or function of the "security lock data" .
However, they are said to be  "vital to the System .
If you enter them incorrectly Market Wizard will calculate incorrectly and that is likely to lead to false instructions. .
The daily updating procedure is one which  "must be followed every trading day as long as you are actively using the System .
Failure to follow the daily signal may cause you to miss a Market Wizard entry or exit signal .
This may cause a serious loss. .
Failure to do so will also invalidate the guarantee .
\tI conclude therefore, on the facts of this case, that there was a sufficiently direct link between the activities of the company and the advice received by users on the merits of particular investments, and that accordingly the company\'s business did involve the giving of such advice .
I accept that in some cases the line may not be easy to draw .
If the selling of such computer programmes is regarded as a serious problem by the relevant authorities, there may be a case for some amendment to the definition of investment business to clarify the position in borderline cases .
However, I do not regard this as such a case .
In my view authorisation under the Act was clearly required .
\r\n   Misleading statements \tThe petition contains a number of complaints of misleading information in the brochure, the advertisements and the standard letter .
In summary, it is said, the company\'s publicity represents the System as a proven established trading analysis system which produces consistent profits, whereas there is no evidence to support such claims .
In particular, complaint is made of the often repeated representations that use of Market Wizard between July 1996 and June 1997 could have produced earnings of \xc2\xa3145,056 on an investment of \xc2\xa312,000 .
\r\n   \tMr Ashe points to the fact that the brochure makes clear that these figures are derived from a "simulated trading model" .
The "technical data" in the brochure explain the way in which the exercise was conducted, including the assumed "trading strategy" which was adopted pursuant to the signals generated by the programme .
Accordingly, says Mr Ashe, a customer reading that explanation would not have been misled into thinking that this was other than a simulated exercise .
\r\n   \tHowever, other parts of the brochure clearly represent the System as an established and proven model .
For example, it is said to be -\r\n   "an amazing tool that produces profits that will consistently surprise you, and one which Australasian and overseas private and corporate clients...rate...extremely highly on all counts: product quality, support and backup, corporate integrity and global vision. .
\tFurthermore, the newspaper advertisements to which I have referred, and the standard letter sent out with the brochure, say nothing of the simulated nature of the model .
The standard letter, to which I have referred, states in terms that "using Market Wizard as your guide between 1st July 1996 and 30th June 1997 had you invested \xc2\xa312,000 ... you could have earned \xc2\xa3145,056. .
It goes on to say that "astute system traders routinely achieve these type of returns. .
There is no evidence to support those claims .
The System was not available for use between July 1996 and June 1997 .
The company did not produce any evidence of what "astute system traders" routinely achieve .
\r\n   \tMore surprisingly, there was no evidence of any serious attempt to update the model to monitor the results of trading in the period since the System has been marketed in the UK .
I found the company\'s evidence on this aspect difficult to understand .
Mr Day claimed responsibility for the simulated model used in the brochure, which had been produced using a programme (not available to customers) specially designed by Banner for the purpose of such monitoring .
He himself was not familiar with the detail of the programme and only limited explanation was given in the letter he produced from Compvice Ltd, who had developed it .
Mr Day recognised that the results depended on the assumed "trading strategy" built into the programme, but he claimed that this represented a "fair money management strategy" which would be considered "prudent in the industry" .
Mr Day believed that subsequent monitoring had been carried out by his company using the same programme, but he was unable to produce the results of such monitoring .
\r\n   \tMr Smith produced his exhibit "NS9", which was described in his evidence as "particulars of the performance of the System since commencing trading in the UK" .
No source was given for it in the affidavit, and Mr Day denied any knowledge of it .
It purports to show how an investment of \xc2\xa312,000 in March 1997 (some six months before the commencement of trade in the UK) could have shown a profit of almost \xc2\xa340,000 by the end of January 1998 .
Other than saying that it had been produced in his office, Mr Smith was unable to explain it, or the assumed "trading strategy" which had been used .
Nor was he able to respond to the criticisms put to him in cross-examination by Mr Hildyard, for example that the profits were overstated by almost \xc2\xa320,000 because brokerage fees on sale had been added to, rather than subtracted from, profits .
Accordingly, this document has no evidentiary value in support of the company\'s case .
Rather the failure of the company to produce any evidence of reliable monitoring of the performance of its System since it has been marketed, underlines the irresponsibility of the claims originally made .
\r\n   \tThe strongest point in the company\'s favour is the lack of any evidence of serious complaint from users, and the positive support in some of the letters to which I have referred .
Unfortunately, no witnesses were called to support this documentary evidence .
Accordingly, it is impossible to evaluate to what extent the experience of actual customers matches the dramatic claims made in the publicity material.\r\n   \tOn the evidence before me I can only conclude that the Department\'s case is made out and that the company has made seriously misleading statements to promote its product .
\r\n   \tAlthough not essential to the Secretary of State\'s case, it is also submitted that the statements constitute a breach of sections 47 and 57 of the FSA 1986 .
Section 47 makes it an offence to make misleading statements for the purpose of inducing a person to enter into an investment agreement .
Mr Hildyard did not in the event press this submission - rightly so in my view .
The purpose of the misleading statements was to persuade customers to buy the programme, not to buy investments .
\r\n   \tSection 57 contains restrictions on advertising .
It provides that subject to certain qualifications \r\n   "no person other than an authorised person shall issue or cause to be issued an investment advertisement in the United Kingdom unless its contents have been approved by an authorised person. .
An investment advertisement is defined as - "any advertisement inviting persons to enter or offer to enter into an investment agreement... or containing information calculated to lead directly or indirectly to persons doing so. .
\tThe company\'s advertisements and the brochure were clearly designed to encourage customers to believe that investing in the securities concerned was likely to be a profitable exercise, and to that extent was "calculated to lead" at least "indirectly" to them buying and selling such investments .
The advertisements before 28th October 1997 were not authorised, as they should have been, nor was the brochure .
To this extent there was in my view a breach of section 57 .
\r\n   Mr Reichelt\'s involvement in management .
\tMr Reichelt was described as "general manager" of the company .
He was an undischarged bankrupt having been made bankrupt by order of the High Court dated 12th December 1995 .
By section 11 of the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 it is an offence for a person who is an undischarged bankrupt to - \r\n   "act as director of, or directly or indirectly to take part in or be concerned in the promotion, formation or management of, a company, except with the leave of the Court" .
The Secretary of State submits that Mr Reichelt took part in or was concerned in the management of the company and that the company either had knowledge of that, or, in the person of Mr Smith, "turned a blind eye" to Mr Reichelt\'s background .
Re Comstrad \tBy way of background, it is necessary to refer to a judgment of my own in  re Comstrad Ltd.  (27th September 1996 unreported - the transcript wrongly gives the date as 1995) .
Comstrad was a company formed to promote various computer programmes designed allegedly to assist the selection of winners in horse races, or of score draws for football pools .
I held that that was -\r\n   "a business founded on a lie, the lie being that these computer programmes are scientifically based systems with a track record of producing exceptional profits, whereas the reality is that there is no track record at all and, indeed, there is no evidence that they have ever produced profits for anyone or are likely to do so. .
On those grounds I granted the Secretary of State\'s application for the appointment of a provisional liquidator .
The company was subsequently wound up on 2nd October 1996, on the unopposed petition of the Secretary of State .
\tMr Reichelt was also involved in that case .
He was described in the evidence as the "general manager" of the company .
At page 10 of the transcript I commented on his role in the light of the changing emphasis of the company\'s evidence .
I said:\r\n   "More seriously the new evidence raises a serious question mark about who in fact is managing the company .
The earlier evidence, particularly that of Mr Reichelt, proceeded on the basis that he was the general manager of the company and that is consistent with the correspondence and other documentation which shows him active in that role .
Mr Robinson was said at that stage to be an active director employed nearly full time advising the company. .
I then referred to the Secretary of State\'s later evidence raising the point that Mr Reichelt was an undischarged bankrupt and drawing attention to the terms of section 11 .
I continued: "The company\'s response in more recent affidavits of Mr Robinson and Mr Reichelt, is to claim that his role is purely administrative, and that the management of the business has been carried out entirely by Mr Robinson .
I find this claim difficult to reconcile with the earlier evidence and the evidence leaves serious doubts about the management structure .
However, I do not find it necessary to pursue this point in detail; whoever was in charge must take responsibility for the basic lie which as I have found has underlain this business throughout. .
\tAlthough I was not aware of this when giving that judgment, Mr Robinson and Mr Reichelt were also involved at that time in the activities of a company called Interdata UK Ltd, which was promoting a computer programme called Alpha-XL, intended to assist customers in trading on the ordinary stock market .
Interdata apparently was in business for a very short time and its activities ceased when Comstrad, which was supporting it, was wound up .
I was shown a brochure which was prepared in order to explain the product .
In this Mr Robinson was shown as chairman and Mr Reichelt as "general manager" .
Mr Wade was company secretary and Mr Cridland was described as "financial consultant" .
According to the brochure, that programme offered "the objective unemotional calculus of the modern computer combined with the collective minds of genius programmers. .
\r\n   "Concerned in the Management" \tI was referred to a number of authorities in which the expression "being concerned in the management" has been considered .
In  R -v- Campbell  [1984] BCLC 83 the Court of Appeal upheld the appellant\'s conviction for breach of an order under section 188 of the Companies Act 1948, by which he was prohibited from taking part in or being concerned in the management of a company .
His role was described as that of "a management consultant" .
As Beldam J said:\r\n   "The thrust of this appeal is that in the circumstances of this case an independent person such as a management consultant, who is not a director or officer of a company, cannot commit this offence since he does not control the decision making process. .
(p84H) The Court approved the distinction drawn by the judge in his summing up -  "between managing certain specific aspects of the company\'s activities, such as production sales trading and the like, and the central management of the affairs of the company, that is to say the matters normally undertaken by the directors or officers of the company . .
(p85B-C) They also rejected a submission that he should have directed the jury that "advising on financial and managing restructuring of the company" could not constitute the offence .
"In the opinion of this Court, if he had done so it would have been a mis-direction for, as we shall show advising on financial management and restructuring of a company may well amount to being concerned indirectly in the management of the company .
It is the business of the directors to manage the business of the company ... and in advising directors on financial and management structures, a person may well be being concerned directly or indirectly in the management of that company. .
(p85 G-H) \tLater they referred to an extract from the Judge\'s summing-up where he had made clear that the question was one of fact and degree for the jury, and had continued -\r\n   "When I say it is a question of degree that does not mean that you have not got to decide it .
.. .
In this case you have to say whether this defendant\'s conduct is proved to be and thus clearly is on the side of taking part in the management .
Not merely being consulted and giving advice when called upon, but actually standing beside (the managing director) and giving him such continuous advice which is so continuously put into effect that he can only be described as taking part. .
(p87F-G) .
\tBeldam J commented that that direction if anything erred on the side of being too favourable .
This was because the Judge had apparently regarded the words "concerned in" and "taking part in" as having the same meaning .
Beldam J said that this was too restrictive a view .
The wording of the section was - \r\n   "so widely cast that it is the opinion of this Court that it is intended to insulate persons, against whom an order of disqualification has been made, from taking part in the management of company affairs generally .
It is cast in the widest terms \'... in any way whether directly or indirectly, being concerned or taking part in the management....\' .
It would be difficult to imagine a more comprehensive phraseology designed to make it impossible for persons to be part of the management and central direction of company affairs. .
(p88B-C) \tIn  re Clasper Group Service Ltd  [1988] 4BCC 673 Warner J had to consider the application of a similar expression in section 212 of the Insolvency Act 1986 .
He held, on the facts of that case, that the functions of the employee concerned were "too lowly" for him to come within the section .
He was the son of the controlling shareholder, but according to the evidence -\r\n   "He appears never to have risen much above the status of an office boy and messenger, although he was provided with some management training. .
(p678) .
\tSome assistance may also be found in the words of Shaw LJ in  Re a Company  [1980] 1Ch 138, 144 .
This case was concerned with section 441 of the Companies Act 1948, which gave certain powers to the High Court where it was shown that a person while an officer of a company had "committed an offence in connection with the management of the company\'s affairs" .
He said;\r\n   "The expression \'manager\' should not be too narrowly construed .
It is not to be equated with the managing or other director or a general manager .
As I see it, any person who in the affairs of the company exercises a supervisory control which reflects the general policy of the company for the time being or which is related to the general administration of the company is in the sphere of management .
He need not be a member of the board of directors .
He need not be subject to specific instructions of the board .
If he fulfils a function which touches the central administration of the company that is sufficient in my view to constitute him an "officer" or "manager" of the company for the purposes of section 441 of the Act. .
\tThe fullest discussion to which I was referred was in a judgment of Ormiston J in  Commissioner for Corporate Affairs -v- Bracht  in the Supreme Court of Victoria (1989) 7 ACLC 40, in which he reviewed a number of authorities including the two Court of Appeal cases to which I have referred .
That case concerned a statutory provision in very similar terms to section 11 .
The respondent, Bracht, had been involved in negotiating credit facilities on behalf of the company and had held discussions with the company\'s bank manager as to the obtaining of bank guarantees .
The magistrate had dismissed the charges apparently on the grounds that the director to whom Mr Bracht reported had "effective or ultimate control" .
Having referred to  R -v- Campbell  and the dicta of Shaw LJ in  Re a Company , the Judge said:\r\n   "There must be an element of decision making, which affects the corporate enterprise as a whole, but those responsible need not form part of the board, nor even need they be executives directly communicating with the board .
Nevertheless, in the ordinary course of affairs, it is only in a large company that a person outside this latter category, so far removed from the power of control exercised by the directors, may be engaged in the \'management\' of a company .
In a small company like the present the actions of those directly answerable to the directors may amount to \'management\', for, even if those people are also engaged in routine activities of the kind not normally associated with management, it is sufficient if powers and functions are delegated to those persons which are likely in their performance to have a significant effect on the business and financial standing of the company .
As it is a protective section, protective at least to the creditors and shareholders, it must have been designed to prevent the participation in management of those who might put the solvency or the probity of the corporation\'s administration at risk .
Persons not given any significant discretion or advisory role in decision making could not therefore be intended as an object of the prohibition .
It may be difficult to draw the line in particular cases, but in my opinion the concept of \'management\' for present purposes, comprehends activities which involve policy and decision making, related to the business affairs of a corporation, affecting the corporation as a whole or a substantial part of that corporation, to the extent that the consequences of the formation of those policies or the making of those decisions may have some significant bearing on the financial standing of the corporation or the conduct of its affairs. .
(p47-48) He understood the expression "take part in" to connote "active participation":   "Such participation would have to be real and direct, but not necessarily in a role in which ultimate control is exercised, although it would have to be more than the administrative carrying out of the orders of others responsible for a company\'s management . .
(p48) \tAs to the expression "being concerned in" he said:\r\n   "In the present section I would see the prohibition as covering a wide range of activities relating to the management of the corporation, each requiring an involvement of some kind in the decision making processes of that corporation .
That involvement must be more than passing, and certainly not of a kind where merely clerical or administrative acts are performed .
It requires activities involving some responsibility but not necessarily of an ultimate kind whereby control is exercised .
Advice given to management, participation in its decision making processes, and execution of its decisions going beyond the mere carrying out of directions as a employee, would suffice. .
(p49) .
\tBefore me both parties were content for me to adopt the guidance contained in these authorities, including the Australian case .
The extracts which I have cited demonstrate the difficulty of achieving a succinct test .
Essentially it is a "jury question" .
I would, however, respectfully agree with Ormiston J in emphasising that "ultimate control" is not a necessary element, and further in the emphasis he gives to those functions which are relevant to "the solvency or the probity of the corporation\'s administration".\r\n   Mr Reichelt\'s role \tTurning to the evidence in the present case, Mr Reichelt explained the background of his involvement in those businesses and his role in the Company .
He had been a solicitor in Queensland before he came to this country in 1992 .
Since 1994 he has been employed by Mr Wade, acting for various Asian and Australian concerns doing business in the UK .
He had permission from the Department of Employment to be employed by Mr Wade as an "international legal consultant" .
Accordingly, such services as he provided to companies like Comstrad or Market Wizard were provided nominally in the name of Mr Wade or one of his companies .
The precise nature of the arrangements between Mr Wade and Mr Reichelt were not entirely clear from the evidence .
It seems that Mr Wade provided Mr Reichelt with a flat and living expenses, and additional payments which apparently varied according to what Mr Wade was able to pay .
\r\n   \tMr Wade and Mr Reichelt were introduced to Mr Smith in April 1997 by a business acquaintance .
According to Mr Reichelt, Mr Smith was aware of his previous involvement with Comstrad, but not that he was bankrupt or of the disqualification which went with it .
He understood that Mr Smith required simply "someone to liaise if he or his wife had to be out of the UK at the same time and that this would not frequently occur" .
He says that he agreed to act as general manager, provided that this did not involve anything other than strictly administrative tasks and the company was being fully managed by the Smiths .
He says that his role with the company was "strictly administrative" .
He did not have a separate office or a secretary .
He was not authorised to send letters without approval from Mr or Mrs Smith, and when they were away from the office he referred every piece of correspondence and every management decision to them .
\r\n   \tMr Wade gave evidence supporting Mr Reichelt\'s account .
He says that Mr Reichelt was always an employee of his firm and that he was in daily contact with him .
He did not mention Mr Reichelt \'s bankrupt status to Mr Smith, because it did not appear to him to be of any importance, Mr Reichelt not being an officer of the company .
He received all his instructions from Mr or Mrs Smith .
\r\n   \tMr Smith\'s view of matters was rather different .
When he met them, he had been told of their involvement with Comstrad and Interdata, and it was for that reason that he thought they would be useful .
As he said, they had been "involved with people that have got a very bad track record and they would know all the flaws in the business. .
He regarded Mr Reichelt as "a very smart man", with a good record as a lawyer and a businessman in Queensland .
He regarded him as "an excellent administrator that could do anything within reason" .
He was "a very learned man .
... he has got very high qualifications, so I run a lot of things past Mr Reichelt all the time, because I believe he is much smarter than me. .
He liaised with him regularly when he was away, and treated him as his "right hand man" .
It was Mr Smith who chose the title "general manager" .
\r\n   \tEven if one accepts Mr Reichelt\'s evidence that he referred all management decisions to Mr Smith, it is quite clear in my view that he was at least "concerned in the management" in the sense explained in the authorities .
As I have indicated, the fact that he did not have ultimate control is not critical .
Mr Smith clearly relied on him in making his business decisions and in the general administration of the business .
He had no reason to do otherwise since he was not aware of Mr Reichelt \'s disqualification .
It is also clear that Mr Smith was away for substantial periods .
In particular, he was away for more than two months over Christmas 1997 .
Even with modern means of communication, effective management of the business would have been impossible without someone such as Mr Reichelt in charge of the office.\r\n   \tPerhaps the clearest indication of Mr Reichelt\'s central role is in relation to the "compliance meetings" which he attended with Mr Wade and Mr Cridland .
Although he claimed that even then he was acting under direct instructions from the Smiths, there is no indication of that in the minutes which he himself prepared .
Furthermore, Mr Smith had no detailed knowledge of the statutory and other requirements with which the company was seeking to comply .
Thus for example in the minutes of the meeting on 3rd November it is recorded that -\r\n   "(Mr Reichelt) agreed that as general manager of MWS, in charge of office administration, he would undertake to implement recommended procedural changes and report any known breaches of agreed procedures to the compliance officer who would then decide if it was a matter which required specific reference to Astwick and company . .
\tThus, one can see that quite apart from his ordinary role as "right hand man" to Mr Smith, he was taking direct responsibility in relation to an aspect of the business which was critical to "the probity of the corporation\'s administration".\r\n   \tThere is a separate question as to the extent to which the company should be held responsible for the breach of section 11 .
Although I accept that Mr Smith did not himself know of Mr Reichelt\'s bankrupt status, or of its consequences under section 11, he was aware of Comstrad\'s dubious activities and the fact that it had been closed down pursuant to Court action .
Indeed, he believed that they had "pinched" some of his own publicity material .
Yet it was to Mr Wade, Mr Reichelt and Mr Cridland, all of whom had been deeply involved with Comstrad and Interdata, that he deliberately entrusted the compliance aspects of his business .
Had he made minimal enquiries, or even asked for a copy of my judgment in   Re Comstrad , he would have become aware of the additional problem of Mr Reichelt\'s bankrupt status.\r\n   \tI find it difficult to understand why Mr Smith should have adopted this course particularly against the background of his difficulties with ASC in Australia .
Overall, I did not find him to be an unconvincing witness .
His protests that his was not a "Comstrad company" were heartfelt, and it may well be that there is more substance to the Market Wizard programme than there was to the Comstrad one .
Mr Reichelt and Mr Wade on the other hand I found to be unreliable witnesses .
They must have been well aware that Mr Smith, in view of his extensive business interests in Australia, required something more than an administrative clerk .
Yet they accepted for Mr Reichelt the post of "general manager" without disclosing his disqualification, and without seeking any written clarification of his precise functions .
It is particularly extraordinary that Mr Wade, who was supposed to be solicitor to the company and "compliance officer", could have thought it right to act in this way .
An equally unsatisfactory feature of his evidence was his "failure to recall" the correspondence he had had in 1996 in his capacity as secretary of Interdata with the SIB on the Interdata system .
In particular their letter of 19th April 1996 made clear their view that the programme being promoted by Interdata contravened the Act .
I find it impossible to accept that he would have failed to remember it in his discussions with Mr Smith .
Unfortunately, Mr Smith was won over by Mr Wade, whom he saw as "a lovely English gentleman ... a solicitor on The Strand" .
He must take responsibility for his credulity .
\r\n   Insolvency and inadequate accounting records .
\tI will deal with these two issues together because they are linked and they can be dealt with shortly .
The company\'s duty under section 221 of the Companies Act 1985 was to keep accounting records "sufficient to show and explain the company\'s transactions", and such as to "disclose with a reasonable accuracy, at any time, the financial position of the company at that time" .
The precise state of the company\'s affairs is impossible to ascertain from the documents before me .
There are various different sets of accounts at different dates, but Mr Ashe, for the company, does not claim that any of them represent a complete or reliable statement of the company\'s affairs.\r\n   \tThe company had its own accountant, a Mr Sengupta, but he was not called as a witness .
There was an affidavit from Mr Simpson, who is Mr Smith \'s financial adviser in Australia, but he also was not called .
The accounts prepared by him are clearly incomplete .
Mr Alexander of Pannell Kerr Forster was called as a witness and had prepared a report on the company\'s solvency .
However, he had no access to any primary records of the company and was not able to provide any information to supplement that contained in the other material .
The Official Receiver, on his appointment as provisional liquidator in March, extracted a computerised balance sheet and profit and loss account from the company\'s computer system .
However, his report records that Mr Smith accepted that these records "did not accurately reflect the true financial position of the company" .
The company has not yet complied with its obligation to provide a statement of affairs to the provisional liquidator, as required by him pursuant to section 131 of the Insolvency Act 1986 .
\r\n   \tIn particular there is no adequate documentation to record the amounts or status of the loans made to the company by Mr Smith or his Australian companies .
The most recent information, provided to Mr Alexander by Mr Simpson in a letter of 12th June, shows a total of $561,591.53, including payments by Mr Smith direct, by WSA and by Arecki Property Ltd .
It is impossible to relate these amounts to the other balance sheets .
The only written agreement is the so-called Arecki agreement .
However, only some $91,000 of the outstanding amount is attributable to Arecki Property Ltd.  \r\n   \tThere has been a clear failure to comply with section 221 .
Furthermore, from such information as is available, the company is insolvent by the "balance sheet test"; that is (in terms of s 123(2) of the Insolvency Act 1986) - \r\n   "The value of the company\'s assets is less than the amount of its liabilities taking into account its contingent and prospective liabilities. .
\tThe extent of the deficiency differs depending on which set of accounts one looks at .
Thus, the March 1998 balance sheet reproduced in the Official Receiver\'s report shows net liabilities of \xc2\xa3106,202.49, while the balance sheet attached to Mr Alexander\'s report, which had been prepared by Mr Simpson, showed an excess of liabilities over assets of \xc2\xa3164,740 .
Mr Alexander\'s view was that the balance sheet test was irrelevant because, as he put it:\r\n   "If the unsecured loans from Mr Smith personally in his Australian companies, which are not currently due or payable, were excluded from the balance sheet it would show an excess of assets over liabilities .... " (report para 3.12) .
That view however, was expressed on the basis that loans were all covered by the Arecki agreement, and that the lender\'s rights of recovery were thereby restricted .
That is not the case .
\tMr Smith\'s response to these points was two-fold: first, any deficiencies in the company\'s accounting records were due to the failures of the accountant, and could and would have been rectified before the first year\'s accounts were audited, had the Secretary of State not intervened; and, secondly, that even if the loans were not fully documented, there was no question of Mr Smith withdrawing the money which he had invested in the company, and that in practice it was perfectly capable of meeting its debts as they fell due .
There is some force in both points .
No doubt was cast on Mr Smith\'s ability to support the company nor on his intention to do so if it is allowed to remain in business .
Nor is there any evidence that anyone has been put at risk by the deficiencies in the accounting documentation .
Mr Smith seems unused to drawing a very clear distinction between his own activities and those of his various companies, and he evidently depends on his Australian financial advisers to sort out the position at the end of the year .
They appear to have found considerable difficulty in doing this given the inadequacies of the systems put in place by the United Kingdom accountants .
If this were the only complaint, it is unlikely that it would been a sufficient reason to justify winding up the company provided there were evidence of urgent steps to rectify the accounting position and put the loans on a proper basis .
\r\n   Conclusion \tIt remains for me to conduct the "balancing exercise" .
In this connection I note that the following undertakings were offered by the company through Mr Ashe at the end of the hearing:\r\n     \r\n1 .
To complete the Statement of Affairs within two weeks.\r\n     \r\n2 .
To complete an audit of the company\'s accounts within 6 weeks.\r\n     \r\n3 .
In so far as the company has not done so to comply with section 221 Companies Act 1985 (accounting records).\r\n     \r\n4 .
Not to engage the services of Mr Reichelt or Mr Wade.\r\n   These undertakings do not address the fundamental problem that the company\'s business is unlawful .
I would in any event be unwilling to accept the undertakings without some further evidence as to how the accounting deficiencies are going to be rectified, and who in the absence of Mr Reichelt and Mr Wade is going to be responsible for the day-to-day management of the company .
\tThe most important consideration in the Company\'s favour is the lack of any evidence of actual harm to customers .
Rather there is the prospect of detriment to customers whose expectation of a continued service from the company will be disappointed .
It is unclear on the evidence before me what prospects they would have of recouping their investment from the  company.\r\n   \tAgainst this, I have found that each of the complaints made by the Secretary of State is made out .
Most importantly, the business which the company was set up to conduct is an unlawful business in the absence of authorisation under the FSA .
There may be cases where failure to obtain authorisation at the outset is due to an inadvertent error and there is some prospect of it being corrected .
In such circumstances the remedy of winding up might be unduly drastic .
However, this is not such a case .
All those concerned with the promotion of the company were well aware that they were entering a very sensitive field, and Mr Wade at least was aware of the SIB\'s previous view of the matter .
They have only themselves to blame if they did not take any steps to secure clearance before they commenced the business .
Furthermore, they have failed to produce any evidence to persuade me that authorisation is likely in the future .
In these circumstances I see no alternative but to allow the petition .
\r\n    .
b'Mr Justice Rix: \tThis, I am told, is the first case to come to trial arising out of what is called "Pension Mis-selling" in which a life assurance company seeks to be indemnified by its professional indemnity insurance underwriters for the losses it has or may yet sustain by reason of the need to compensate investors for such mis-selling of pensions to them .
The plaintiffs, J Rothschild Assurance plc ("JRA"), are well known sellers of life assurance and pension policies .
The first defendant, Mr John Robert Collyear, is a representative Lloyd\'s underwriter, and the other defendants are either also representative Lloyd\'s underwriters or insurance companies who together subscribed to three policies, numbered 200492/AA, 200492X1/93 and 200492X2/93 .
These three policies are "claims made" policies covering the period from 1 February 1993 to 31 January 1994 inclusive (the "policies") .
The limit under the first (primary layer) policy is \xc2\xa35 million .
The limit under the second (first excess) policy is \xc2\xa35 million excess of \xc2\xa35 million .
The limit under the third (second excess) policy is \xc2\xa310 million excess of \xc2\xa310 million .
Thus the total cover under the three policies extends to \xc2\xa320 million .
Each of the policies is otherwise in all material respects on identical terms.\r\n   \tAs of June 1998 JRA have already compensated or offered to compensate some 400 priority cases .
The value of such compensation in individual cases is generally under \xc2\xa310,000 or at any rate \xc2\xa320,000, but some are of a higher order .
There are only three which go above \xc2\xa350,000 .
I mention such figures because one of the issues debated before me concerns the policies\' excess limits .
It may be that further investigations will show that up to many times that number of 400 investors will need to be compensated .
JRA calculate that the cost of implementing the review of their investors\' cases has amounted to \xc2\xa3840,254 up to the end of 1997 alone .
There is an issue before me as to whether or how such costs are to be dealt with under the policies.\r\n   \tTo assist the parties to this litigation to get to grips with the many issues which arise on the many different individual cases of compensation for which JRA are seeking an indemnity, Mr Justice Clarke made an order on 10 February 1998 that a maximum of ten sample claims be selected and that those ten claims be tried "and that proceedings in relation to all other issues be stayed pending such trial" .
Ten such sample claims have been selected; but in the preparation for and in the course of this trial the parties have come to appreciate that they are not in a position to try such cases on their facts, but have rather used them to illustrate certain basic themes and to isolate certain basic issues which they wish to have argued and resolved .
This trial has therefore followed a somewhat different path from that envisaged by Mr Justice Clarke: but I think the goal aimed at is much the same.\r\n   \tIn brief, then the issues which have been debated before me are as follows.\r\n   \tFirst, there is an issue regarding  notification  .
The policies, as I have already mentioned, are on a "claims made" basis .
No claims, at any rate no claims with which this litigation is concerned, were made in the policy year .
However, the policies required JRA to give notice of any circumstance of which JRA became aware which might give rise to a claim against them, whereupon any claim to which that circumstance gave rise, even though made after the policy year had expired, would be deemed to have been made within it .
Following a report by KPMG Peat Marwick to the Securities and Investment Board (SIB) in December 1993 (the "KPMG report"), Lautro (the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation), the self regulating organisation (SRO) of which JRA were a member for the purpose of regulation under the Financial Services Act 1986 (the "Act"), wrote to their members to say that the KPMG report disclosed a "problem which needs to be tackled" regarding non-compliance in the selling of pensions in certain classes of cases, known as "transfers" and "opt-outs" (of which more below) .
On 27 January 1994, only a few days before the expiry of the policy year, JRA\'s solicitors, Messrs Titmuss Sainer & Webb, wrote to the underwriters\' agents purporting to give notice by reference to the Lautro letter and the KPMG report of circumstances "which may give rise to a claim" against them (ie against JRA) .
The underwriters, however, disputed that that was a valid notice for the purpose of the clause, on the basis that no criticism had been levelled against JRA personally, and no cause for concern specific to any of JRA\'s investors had been identified .
The clause in question is  General Condition 2 .
\tSecondly, there is a  non-disclosure  issue .
The underwriters say that if, contrary to their primary case on the first issue, JRA\'s notice in January 1994 was a valid notice, then JRA ought also but previously to have disclosed to underwriters the contents of a Lautro document of 15 July 1992 called "Enforcement Bulletin No 16", in which reference is made to an "overall problem" regarding that particular category of pension sales known as "opt-outs", namely sales to investors who were opting out of their occupational pension scheme .
Since JRA had not disclosed the circumstances described in that Bulletin, the underwriters say that in the case of investor claims arising out of  opt-outs  JRA are without cover by reason of  Exclusion 2  to the policies which excludes inter alia any claim arising out of any circumstances "known" to JRA prior to inception .
A question arises whether Exclusion 2 is inconsistent with the policies\'  Special Conditions , which both limit the underwriters\' right to avoid for non-disclosure or misrepresentation to instances of fraudulent intent, and limit JRA\'s recovery, in the case of claims arising out of circumstances which were known and ought to have been notified under a preceding insurance, to the amount and extent afforded by that preceding insurance .
\tThirdly, there is what is perhaps the most fundamental issue of all, and that is whether the cases of compensation come within the policies at all as "claims ... made" under  Insuring Clause 1  .
What happened was that Lautro and its successor, the PIA (the Personal Investment Authority), required their members to set up a review to investigate the pensions mis-selling problem, and to offer redress to all those investors who, as a result of such review, were shown to have been mis-sold a pension in breach of the applicable self-regulatory rules and to have suffered loss as a result .
Thus the initiative was taken by the members, JRA among them, rather than by the investors .
In these circumstances the underwriters submit that, with rare exceptions, no claims have ever been asserted .
This is the  claims  issue .
\tFourthly, there is an issue regarding  costs .
Insuring Clause 4  provides that underwriters will also indemnify JRA in respect of all costs and expenses incurred "in defence or settlement of any claim" which falls to be dealt with under the policies .
Since there are no such claims, submit the underwriters, there can be no such costs, and in any event such costs must be those incurred on specific claims, and not the whole expense of the review of JRA\'s investors .
\tFifthly, there is an issue regarding  excess  limits .
JRA\'s excess under the policies is \xc2\xa350,000 each and every claim, but only three cases of compensation so far identified are for more than that figure .
However, the pensions in question were sold through JRA\'s salesforce of "appointed representatives" who have self-employed status but who enter into contracts for services to act as agents for JRA .
JRA are responsible under section 44(6) of the Act for everything that their appointed representatives do in carrying on JRA\'s investment business .
However, each appointed representative is also potentially liable for his own mis-selling .
JRA\'s appointed representatives are also insured under the policies and are defined therein as "Joint-Assureds" with separate inner limits on the underwriters\' liability in respect of each of them, and with separate excess limits .
These excess limits depend on the representatives\' commission income and rise from a minimum of \xc2\xa31,000 up to \xc2\xa310,000 (save where commission income is over \xc2\xa31 million in which case the excess is to be separately agreed) .
The underwriters submit that it is JRA\'s excess of \xc2\xa350,000 which applies to every claim which JRA makes against them, whereas JRA submit that in effect it is the excess of the individual appointed representative concerned which applies .
\tThese five issues can be identified in the terms of five declarations which the parties invite me to decide whether or not to make, viz: (1)  Notification:   A declaration that JRA\'s solicitors\' letter dated 27 January 1994 was a valid notification under General Condition 2 of the policies in relation to sample claims 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 10 .
(2)  Non-disclosure:   A declaration that JRA are not deprived by Exclusion 2 of the policies of an indemnity in respect of opt-out claims by reason of their knowledge prior to the inception of the policies of the terms of Lautro\'s Enforcement Bulletin No 16 dated 15 July 1992 .
(3)  Claims:   A declaration that the indemnities sought by JRA against the underwriters in relation to sample claims 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 10 are in respect of "any claim or claims ... made against them ... in respect of any Civil Liability" within the meaning of Insuring Clause 1 of the policies .
(4)  Costs:   A declaration that JRA are entitled to be indemnified pursuant to Insuring Clause 4 of the policies in respect of such part of the costs incurred in reviewing and investigating those cases of pension mis-selling in respect of which the underwriters are liable to indemnify JRA in accordance with Insuring Clause 1 .
(5)  Excess:  A declaration that on the true construction of Insuring Clause 5, the First Schedule and Special Memorandum 1 of the policies the appropriate excess to be applied where JRA are indemnified by underwriters in relation to claims under the policies arising out of the mis-selling of pensions by appointed representatives is the relevant excess of the appointed representative who sold the pension .
\tSince the trial did not take the form which the order of Mr Justice Clarke provided for, I can foresee that, potentially or theoretically at any rate, questions may hereafter be raised as to the status of other issues which were present, or might be said to have been present, on the pleadings but which have not been debated before me .
I have not discussed this with counsel .
I would be happy to think that no questions of this nature will arise .
If, however, they do, they will have to be resolved in due course .
Certainly, it was common ground that the sample claims were not before me for the purpose of any money judgment or the trial of any factual issues upon which a money judgment might be dependent - other than the (in part) factual issue of whether the written documentation before me on sample claims 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 10 amounted to a "claim" .
Even so, I think that JRA reserved the right to seek to show that in individual cases - but perhaps not in those cases - there were oral complaints or communications which in any event might be said to amount to a "claim" .
Moreover, express mention was made before me of issues of legal liability and of co-insurance which by common consent were stood over.\r\n   \tA particular difficulty was discussed in the case of the excess issue .
This arose out of a late amendment to the underwriters\' pleadings, for which I gave leave during the trial: see paragraph 11A of the reamended points of defence and counterclaim .
JRA disputed the underwriters\' entitlement to leave, on the basis that the amendment was entirely new and disruptive .
The underwriters submitted that the excess issue had been sufficiently on the pleadings from the start, and their reamendment was only to make the matter plainer .
On behalf of the underwriters, however, Mr Kealey QC accepted that any riposte involving an issue of fact could and would be put off to another day: such as the possibilities, not yet pleaded, that had been floated by Mr Symons QC on behalf of JRA relating to estoppel by convention (on the basis that past claims had always been dealt with on the basis of the appointed representative\'s excess), or to a special market meaning of the excess provisions .
Mr Symons also pointed out that the excess issue would necessitate him looking more carefully at the definition of a "claim" in the aggregation clause to be found in Definition 4 - which would itself need further evidence of fact which had not been prepared for the present hearing .
It might turn out, Mr Symons suggested, that some or all of JRA\'s claims were to be treated as "one claim" for the purposes of that clause, in which case the JRA excess of \xc2\xa350,000 could apply only once (or a few times at most) .
In granting leave, I ruled that any issue of fact would have to be adjourned, but that I would deal with the basic issue of construction  if I could  .
I had in mind that it was not possible then to know whether that issue could be properly decided by itself, or whether it would turn out to be safer to consider it in the context of such other arguments as might arise on a later occasion.\r\n   \tHaving set out the bare bones of the issues which fall for decision, I must next refer to the detailed terms of the policies and then to the regulatory framework in which the parties were operating.\r\n   The policies \tThe policies are fully composite policies insuring not only JRA and associated companies but also the appointed representatives .
Thus General Condition 5 (see below) points out that the various assureds and joint-assureds are separately indemnified "as if a separate policy had been issued to each".\r\n   \tThe "assureds" are defined in Definition 1 as including JRA as well as named associated and all subsidiary companies and their appointed representatives .
When the policies wish to refer only to the assured companies, they use the term "J Rothschild" .
When they want to refer only to the appointed representatives, they use the term "Joint-Assureds(s)" .
"Appointed Representatives" are themselves defined by reference to section 44 of the Act .
That and other references to the Act (see Insuring Clause 1 below) indicates, as would in any event be inferred, that the policies were drafted with knowledge of and against the background of the Act and its regulatory framework.\r\n   \tThe Insuring Clauses read in relevant part as follows:\r\n   \t"1 .
To indemnify the ASSURED against any claim or claims first made against them during the period of insurance set forth in the First Schedule in respect of any Civil Liability whatsoever or whensoever arising (including liability for Claimants\' costs) incurred in the course of the business carried on by or on behalf of THE ASSURED .
With respect to any breach of Section 62 of the Financial Services Act 1986 no indemnity shall be afforded to any person committing or condoning any malicious or deliberate breach .
\t"2 .
To indemnity THE ASSURED against any loss or losses which, during the period specified in the First Schedule, they shall discover they have sustained by reason or any fraudulent act or omission of any past or present partner, director, principal or EMPLOYEE ... \t"4 .
The liability of the Underwriters shall not exceed in all under this Policy the sum specified in the First Schedule but Underwriters shall in addition indemnify THE ASSURED in respect of all costs and expenses incurred with their written consent in the defence or settlement of any claim which falls to be dealt with under this Policy ... \t"5 .
The amount specified as the Excess in the First Schedule shall be borne in respect of each and every claim by THE ASSURED at their own risk, and Underwriters\' Liability shall only be in excess of this amount .
\tThe excess shall not be applicable to:- \t... \t5.2  Costs and expenses incurred with Underwriters\' consent. .
\tThere follows a section headed Special Conditions .
There are three unnumbered paragraphs, but I have numbered them for ease of reference:\r\n   \t"[1] .
Underwriters will not exercise their right to avoid this Policy where it is alleged that there has been non-disclosure or misrepresentation of facts or untrue statements in the proposal form, provided always that THE ASSURED shall establish to Underwriters\' satisfaction that such alleged non-disclosure, misrepresentation or untrue statement, was free of any fraudulent intent .
\t"[2] .
However, in any case of a claim first made against THE ASSURED during the period of this insurance where (1) they had previous knowledge of the circumstances which could give rise to such claim and (2) they should have notified the same under any preceding insurance, then, where the indemnity or cover under this Policy is greater or wider in scope than that to which THE ASSURED would have been entitled under such preceding insurances (whether with other Underwriters or not), Underwriters shall only be liable to afford indemnity to such amount and extent as would have been afforded to THE ASSURED by such preceding insurance. .
\tThe third paragraph stated that in the event of any dispute regarding the application of the Special Conditions, such dispute shall be referred to arbitration .
The parties, however, have been content to waive that provision for arbitration.\r\n   \tExclusions then contain the following provision (Exclusion 2) of relevance:\r\n   \t"The Policy shall not indemnify THE ASSURED against any claim or loss:- \t2 .
Arising out of any circumstances or occurrence which has been notified under any other policy or certificate attaching prior to the inception of this Policy or which were known to THE ASSURED prior to the inception of this Policy. .
\tThe next section of the policies is headed General Conditions, from which I cite the following:\r\n   \t"2 .
THE ASSUREDS shall as a CONDITION PRECEDENT to their right to be indemnified under this Policy give to the Underwriters notice as soon as possible during the period of this Policy as set forth in the Schedule:- \t(a)  of any circumstance of which THE ASSURED shall become aware which may give rise to a claim or loss against them or any of them; \t(b)  of the receipt of notice from any person whether written or oral of an intention to make a claim against any of them; ... \tSuch notice having been given to Underwriters THE ASSURED shall give to the Underwriters as soon as possible full details in writing of the circumstances which may give rise to a claim or loss against them or any of them .
Any claim or loss to which that circumstance has given rise which is subsequently made after the expiration of the period specified in the First Schedule shall be deemed for the purpose of this Policy to have been made during the subsistence hereof. .
\tSpecial Memoranda set out the following further provisions: \t"1 .
(a) The indemnity provided under this Policy to each and every APPOINTED REPRESENTATIVE shall be limited to either \xc2\xa3250,000 ANY ONE CLAIM or \xc2\xa3500,000 any one claim as specified by J Rothschild .
\tEach such indemnity shall be evidenced by the issue of an EVIDENCE of COVER DOCUMENT issued to each JOINT-ASSURED .
\tAll such indemnities under the said ECD shall be subject to the Limit of Liability in aggregate of all claims ... \tThe excesses applicable in respect of each and every claim under the said ECD shall be in accordance with the following scale and shall be borne by the APPOINTED REPRESENTATIVE:- Commission Income Excess Up to \xc2\xa3100,000 \xc2\xa31,000 \xc2\xa3100,001 - \xc2\xa3250,000 \xc2\xa32,500 \xc2\xa3250,001 - \xc2\xa3500,000 \xc2\xa35,000 \xc2\xa3500,001 - \xc2\xa31,000,000 \xc2\xa310,000 Above \xc2\xa31,000,000 To be agreed \tThe applicable excess shall be shown on each ECD ... \t"(d)  Fully retroactive cover may be provided by this Policy for any APPOINTED REPRESENTATIVE in respect of their activities prior to their engagement by J ROTHSCHILD subject to full disclosure of those activities and claim declaration being made in their proposal .
There are some 7 appointed representatives who used to be independent financial advisers and who have retroactive cover under the policies .
\t"2 .
Subject otherwise to the terms, limitations and conditions of this Policy, Underwriters shall indemnify THE ASSURED against liability to meet any adjudication made by the Investment Referee or under the complaints procedures of LAUTRO or by the Insurance Ombudsman or similar scheme .
\t4 .
Subject to the deductible, terms limitations and conditions, of this Policy, Underwriters agree to indemnify J ROTHSCHILD for the net ascertained and identifiable costs and expenses of contacting, corresponding with or visiting its clients and policyholders with such urgency and by such means as J ROTHSCHILD deem necessary in order to limit and/or quantify loss in the event of their discovery of any fraud or dishonesty .
\tThe First Schedule sets out the assured, the period of insurance (1.2.93 to 31.1.94), the premium (separately calculated for each appointed representative), as well as the following:\r\n   \t"LIMIT OF LIABILITY: [\xc2\xa35,000,000] with inner Limits of Liability to JOINT-ASSUREDS as provided by Special Memorandum No 1 of this Policy ... \t"EXCESS: \xc2\xa350,000 each and every claim however scale excesses in respect of JOINT-ASSUREDS are as provided for in Special Memorandum No 1 of the Policy ..." \tFinally, I should mention Definition 4, the aggregation clause: \t"4 .
Claim \tAll claims resulting from the same act, error or omission or a series of acts, errors or omissions arising out of the same cause or the same acts, errors or omissions of one person or persons acting together or in which such person or persons is/are concerned or implicated are deemed to be one claim for all purposes of this Policy. .
The regulatory framework \tPersonal pension plans are contracts of insurance constituting long term business within the meaning of the Insurance Companies Act 1982 (the ICA) .
As such they are investments covered by the Act, and selling, or offering or agreeing to sell, personal pensions whether as principal or agent constitutes engaging in "investment business" .
Such business has been regulated by the Act since it came into force on 29 April 1988.\r\n   \tJRA, as authorised insurers under the ICA, are automatically an authorised person for the purposes of the Act as respects the selling of personal pensions .
Appointed representatives are persons employed by an authorised person (the "principal") for the purpose of carrying on specific investment business, viz selling and giving advice to investors about buying the principal\'s investment agreements .
Sections 44(6) and (7) of the Act provide:\r\n   \t"(6)  The principal of an appointed representative shall be responsible, to the same extent as if he had expressly authorised it, for anything said or done or omitted by the representative in carrying on the investment business for which he has accepted responsibility .
\t"(7)  In determining whether an authorised person has complied with - \t\t(a)\tany provision contained in or made under this Act; \t\tor \t\t(b)\tany rules of a recognised self-regulating organisation or recognised professional body, \tanything which a person who at the material time is or was an appointed representative of the authorised person has said, done or omitted as respects investment business for which the authorised person has accepted responsibility shall be treated as having been said, done or omitted by the authorised person. .
\tThe regulatory functions created by the Act were in the first instance entrusted to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, but section 114 provided for the transfer of all or any of those functions to a new self-standing body .
In the event, the majority of those functions were transferred to the SIB .
As from 28 October 1997, the SIB changed its name to the Financial Services Authority, but I shall refer throughout to the SIB for convenience.\r\n   \tBy section 48 of the Act the SIB has power to make rules regulating the conduct of investment business of authorised persons any by section 47A to issue statements of principle regarding the conduct of authorised persons .
In the event that its rules or statements or principle are contravened, the SIB has numerous powers, in particular the power to bring proceedings under section 61 to prevent or remedy the breach of its own rules or the rules of a recognised SRO .
That section entitles a court inter alia to order a person to pay for the loss suffered by investors.\r\n   \tIf, however, an authorised person is subject to the rules of an SRO, then in the first place it is for that SRO to enforce its rules, and the SIB is only permitted to take action under section 61 if it appears to the SIB that that SRO is unable or unwilling to take appropriate steps itself to enforce compliance: see sections 61(1)(a)(iv) and 61(2).\r\n   \tAn SRO is a body which regulates the carrying on of an investment business by enforcing rules which are binding on persons carrying on business of that kind either because they are members of that body or because they are otherwise subject to its control (see section 8 of the FSA) .
Lautro, which I have already mentioned, was recognised by the SIB (see section 10) on 28 April 1988 .
Lautro was replaced by PIA (the Personal Investment Authority) as of 18 July 1994 .
PIA has also replaced Fimbra (the Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association).\r\n   \tJRA became a member of Lautro prior to their commencement of trading on 1 January 1992, and are now a member of PIA .
The Lautro (PIA) Rules (the "Rules") came into force at the time of Lautro\'s recognition as an SRO and are binding on members in contract as part of the contract of membership between members and Lautro .
Therefore as from the time of the commencement of their membership of Lautro, JRA became contractually subject to the Rules .
As stated above, the general scheme of things is for the SROs to be the primary regulators .
It is only if the appropriate SRO fails to act that SIB can exercise its powers under section 61.\r\n   \tThe power of an SRO to enforce its rules in contract or of the SIB to enforce its own rules by virtue of section 61 does not prevent an investor himself exercising any rights or remedies to which he may be personally entitled (see section 61(9)) .
Those rights or remedies may lie at common law, but in addition ("private") investors who have suffered loss as a result of a contravention of an SRO\'s or the SIB\'s rules are given a right of action for damages for breach of statutory duty: see sections 62 and 62A.\r\n   \tRule 3.4 of Lautro\'s Rules requires members to ensure that company representatives are appointed on terms that impose on them a duty to act in compliance with Lautro\'s Code of Conduct, that such representatives in fact comply with the Code, and that the member itself is in a position to enforce compliance by the representatives with the Code .
Moreover, as shown above, a member is personally liable under section 44 of the FSA for the conduct of its appointed representatives.\r\n   \tThe Code of Conduct enshrines a number of principles which have become well known .
There is the "general principle of fair dealing", which includes a principle of due diligence:\r\n   \t"2 .
A company representative shall exercise due skill, care and diligence in his business dealings and shall deal fairly with investors. .
There are the bundle of principles gathered together under the rubric of "best advice" .
Thus, there is the duty to provide adequate information (para 6(a)), the duty to explain risk (para 6(aa)), the duty to avoid giving misleading information (para 6(c)), and the duty to have regard to the investor\'s general financial situation (para 8(1)):\r\n   \t"6 .
A company representative who, in the course of any relevant investment business, has dealings with an investor - \t(a)  shall give the investor all information relevant to those dealings ... \t(aa)  shall use his best endeavours to enable the investor to understand the nature of any risks involved; \t... \t(c)  shall not make inaccurate or unfair criticism of other investment contracts or of any other method of saving or investment, or of any occupational pension scheme or the State earnings-related pension scheme .. .
\t"8 .
(1)  A company representative shall, in advising an investor as to the suitability for that investor of any investment contract, have regard, in particular, to the investor\'s  financial position generally, to any rights he may have under an occupational pension scheme or the State earnings-related pension scheme (if such rights are relevant in the particular case), and to all other relevant circumstances; and he shall use his best endeavours to ensure - \t(a)  that he recommends only that contract or those contracts which are suited to the investor ..." There is also the "general duty to make all relevant enquiries", sometimes known as the duty to know your customer, under para 12: \t"12 .
A company representative shall so far as practicable ascertain all details relating to an investor and his particular circumstances as may be required for the purpose of complying with any duty in this Code or to enable the Member to comply with the requirement of these Rules. .
Pension mis-selling and the SIB review \tThe opportunity to provide for retirement benefits by means of a personal pension, which originally had only been available to the self-employed, was extended to employees by the Social Security Act of 1986 .
Employees in the state pension arrangements were enabled to contract out of the state earnings-related pension scheme (SERPS) by investing in a personal pension plan ("PPP"), and those eligible to participate in an occupational pension scheme were enabled to purchase a PPP instead .
The Social Security Act followed a government White Paper ("Reform of Social Security", Cmnd 9691) which stated at para 2.38:\r\n   \t"For the first time, everyone will be able to choose whether to stay in his employer\'s pension scheme, or fully in the state earnings-related scheme; or to rely upon a personal pension to give him additional income in retirement .
The government are determined that the choice should be as wide as possible ... To give people the maximum choice, the Government want to encourage as wide a range of financial bodies to provide group and personal pension schemes. .
\tApproval of PPPs by the Inland Revenue became available with effect from 1 July 1988 .
As a consequence many employees were advised to leave, or not to join, their occupational pension scheme, and to invest in a personal pension themselves, or when leaving their employment to transfer to their personal pension existing funds from their occupational scheme .
In particular there were two categories of employee investor who invested in PPPs, who, or whose investments, became known as "opt-outs" and "transfers" .
"Opt-outs" are essentially cases in which the investor remains employed in employment where he either has been a member of an occupational pension scheme or has been entitled to have been a member, and instead of remaining or becoming such a member, takes out a PPP .
Sometimes this category is sub-divided into those who come out of an occupational scheme when they invest in a PPP (who may be called "non-joiners") .
"Transfers", on the other hand, are essentially cases were the investor leaves his employment and wishes to transfer into his PPP the current value of his accrued benefits .
Thus in its October 1994 "Pension Transfers and Opt-outs: Review of Past Business" the SIB used the following glossary of terms:\r\n   \t"Non-joiner:  An individual who has declined or failed to join an occupational scheme for which he/she was or is eligible, while continuing in the relevant employment .
\t"Opt-out:  The giving up of active membership of an occupational scheme while continuing in the relevant employment .
This includes the situation where an individual remained in an occupational scheme for life insurance purposes, but left the scheme for pension purposes .
\t"Transfer:  The payment into a personal pension of the cash value of accrued benefits under an occupational scheme for a member who has left active membership of that scheme .
Transfers of all or part of accrued benefits by individuals who have opted out, as well as by former employees, are included. .
\tThere were, however, potential traps for the unwary in this greater flexibility .
Thus, under occupational pension schemes the employee is generally guaranteed "defined benefits" which are linked to salary at retirement or on leaving .
The employer is therefore obliged to fund what, apart from the employees\' own contributions, is needed to enable the guaranteed benefits to be provided .
By contrast, a PPP is a "money purchase" scheme where the benefits available are not guaranteed but will be dependent upon the performance of the investment fund over time and the eventual cost of purchasing pension annuities at the date of retirement .
Moreover, an occupational pension scheme typically provides a variety of benefits, such as widows\' pensions and provisions for dependants and favourable early retirement options, which for a PPP to match would or may require an unrealistically high rate of return to be earned .
Thirdly, opting out of an occupational scheme means the loss of the employer\'s contributions as well as his payment of the scheme\'s administration costs, whereas part of the investor\'s contributions in a PPP, particularly in the early years, goes in expenses.\r\n   \tOn 1 January 1992 JRA started selling pensions to investors .
Its first PII policies, also for a total cover of \xc2\xa320 million, ran from 1 January 1992 to 31 January 1993 .
On 7 February 1992, when JRA had been in business for only a few weeks, Lautro published and circulated its Enforcement Bulletin 14 .
It contained extracts from the report which Lautro\'s monitoring committee had submitted to the Lautro board regarding activities in the year ending June 1991 .
That was of course a period during which JRA had not been in business .
Under the heading of "Complaints" in section 6 of the Bulletin, there appeared a passage (at paras 6.06/10) concerning personal pensions in which members were informed of instances arising of advice to transfer out of occupational schemes without sufficient analysis of the merits of doing so .
The Bulletin commented that\r\n   \t"... the level of complaints received on this score may well understate the scale of the potential problem ... \t"... following the Monitoring Committee\'s consideration of the case described above, a future Enforcement Bulletin will remind Members of the requirements of the rules in this area and the cost and complexity of restoring an investor\'s rights. .
\tThat led in due course to Lautro\'s Enforcement Bulletin No 16 ("EB16") which was circulated to members on 15 July 1992 .
The Introduction contained this passage:\r\n   \t"The Bulletin does not form part of the Rules and members should bear in mind that any view or opinion contained herein is based on circumstances and facts arising in a particular case .
Members should not, therefore, assume that any interpretation, view, or conclusion based on such a case is necessarily applicable to their circumstances. .
Under the heading of "Opting out" the Bulletin introduced the subject with the comment that \t"As described in Enforcement Bulletin 14, it is possible - given the public\'s understandable lack of expertise in the complexities of pensions - that the cases coming to Lautro\'s attention understate the size of  the overall problem .
It has therefore been decided to issue guidance to Members concerning both future sales and current investors. .
As for future sales, EB 16 stated the monitoring committee\'s view \t"that the starting point for a company representative ... should be to assume that it would not constitute "best advice" to recommend opting out into a personal pension plan unless positive arguments in favour of such advice can be established. .
As for future sales to prospective investors contemplating transfers, EB16 merely recommended that the terms of the preserved benefits needed to be examined .
Otherwise members were reminded of the importance in all cases of proper documentation of the advice given, and that analysis would "by no means always" confirm clients as prospective investors .
\tThere then followed a short passage on "Existing Investors", in which members were requested to undertake a special monitoring exercise in respect of PPPs previously sold by company representatives which during the third quarter of 1992 would be terminated or made "paid up" by the investor within two years of purchase .
Among such sales members should then identify any "opt-outs", and contact the investors concerned to determine whether there was any evidence that the sales were made on the basis of inappropriate advice .
JRA conducted this survey, but, not surprisingly given how little time they had been in business, found no such opt-outs falling within the specified criterion.\r\n   \tAs it was, both opt-outs and transfers had to be vetted by management at JRA before a pension sale involving either could proceed .
Moreover, on 16 September 1992, probably as a response to EB 16, JRA issued their own advice to their representatives, headed "Transfers, Best Value or Not? .
It stated inter alia:\r\n   \t"1 .
Leaving the scheme and remaining in service \tRarely will there be valid arguments for advising a client to opt out of their current employer\'s occupational scheme and the initial approach must be one of "stay where you are" ... \t"2 .
A transfer of accrued benefits and has left service\r\n   \t... a thorough examination of the preserved benefits must be made .
Important factors to be considered include:- \t\t1 .
Any guarantees that will be foregone \t\t2 .
How the deferred benefits will increase between now and retirement \t\t3 .
The benefits on early death ... \t\t4 .
The rate of escalation on pensions in payment \t\t5 .
The amount of spouse\'s and/or dependants benefits on death both before and after retirement" \tOn 11 January 1993 JRA completed the proposal form for the policies which I am considering .
Question 11 asked:\r\n   \t"Is the Proposer or any of its Partners or Directors, or Officers, AFTER INQUIRY, aware of any circumstance which may give rise to a claim against the Proposer or its predecessors in business? .
This question was answered by reference to an attached sheet which listed eleven clients who had complained .
One of the eleven listed the "allegation" as "Client should have stayed in occupational scheme" .
\tIn August 1993 SIB commissioned a report from KPMG on a pensions transfer pilot study .
Opt-outs were not part of this study .
On 15 December 1993 KPMG made its report to SIB .
735 client files were reviewed, reflecting over 400 different ceding occupational schemes, sales effected between January 1991 and June 1993, and a representative sample of firms undertaking pension transfer business .
It was found that only 9% of files passed scrutiny as compliant with the conduct of business rules, and that even after guidance issued in EB 16, that figure moved up to only 20% .
Although the majority of cases of non-compliance occurred because of a failure to evidence compliance, and although, as the report stated -\r\n   \t"There is no automatic connection between a client\'s file not evidencing compliance and the client suffering financial disadvantage..." nevertheless, the letter dated 22 December 1993 which Lautro wrote to its members as a result stated that "there is a problem which needs to be tackled" .
Lautro indicated that that problem was likely to embrace opt-outs as well .
\tLautro\'s letter informed members that SIB had therefore created various groups (a steering group, an advisory group, and a working group) to conduct a review (the "SIB review") aimed at developing recommendations for establishing the nature and extent of the problem in both areas of transfers and opt-outs, in particular to discover whether the main problem was poor advice or poor recording, "and what the cost of rectification will be"; for establishing the basis for assessing whether best advice was given; for establishing the appropriate means of restoring the position; and for confirming that the guidance given in EB16 remained valid .
In the light of the publicity which the KPMG report had received, Lautro also gave recommendations as to how its members should meanwhile handle queries or complaints .
The letter added:\r\n   \t"Complaints of significance about transfers and opt-outs should be ring-fenced and handled under separate arrangements from the normal complaints system .
This is to prevent the normal system from being overwhelmed and to permit special procedures to be adopted under guidance from SIB when this is available. .
\tJRA have not called evidence to elucidate how JRA reacted to the KPMG report and Lautro\'s letter, although they could have done so from senior managers who are still in place .
The upshot of the matter, however, was that on 27 January 1994 their solicitors, Titmuss Sainer & Webb, sent to the underwriters\' agents the letter relied on in this litigation as constituting notice under General Condition 2 of circumstances "which may give rise to a claim ... against them" .
The letter (the "TSW letter") referred to the KPMG report and the Lautro letter of 22 December 1993 (the "Lautro letter"), a copy of which was attached, and to a schedule, also attached, of some 2,500 pension transfer policies so far effected by JRA, which they believed but could not guarantee to be complete .
Having briefly restated the principal findings of the KPMG report and described the review proposed by SIB as described in the Lautro letter, TSW continued:\r\n   \t"The circumstances set out above may, in respect of each policy identified and to be identified, give rise to a claim by each client against any of the Assured .
\t"Furthermore, claims may arise against any of the Assured in relation to any advice concerning an "opt-out" from an existing or prospective occupational scheme .
An exercise to identify "opt-out" advice is in hand. .
The reason why transfers could be promptly listed on the attached schedule, but opt-outs could not be, was that transfers could be easily recalled from the JRA computerised data-base, but opt-outs could only be identified by visiting each pension transaction separately.\r\n   \tTo an outsider reading merely what the Lautro letter had to say about the proposed SIB review, it may not appear clear that what SIB had in mind was that the recommendations to be generated were for a review by the industry as a whole into the relevant transactions .
I have no doubt, however, that the TSW letter put the matter accurately when it glossed the review proposals as follows:\r\n   \t"The SIB and Lautro have put in hand enquiries and other steps to lead to the establishment within the financial services industry of suitable mechanisms to ensure that all pension transfers and opt-outs are checked against the proper standards and the necessary remedial work undertaken by the relevant life office to ensure that proper advice is given to investors and, where appropriate, compensation paid to those who have suffered loss. .
\tThe underwriters\' agents replied to the TSW letter on 31 January 1994 .
The first point they took was to put in issue the claim by TSW that the notice sought to be given in their letter was given on behalf of each and every of the assureds, including all the joint-assured appointed representatives .
That objection I am told is no longer pursued .
Formally it may not matter, since none of the appointed representatives have so far been made parties to this litigation .
The main point taken by the underwriters, however, was that the matters relied on in the TSW letter were not circumstances which may give rise to a claim within General Condition 2 .
In particular they objected that the TSW letter purported to make a blanket notification, that no cause for concern specific to any transfer or opt-out case had been mentioned, that no reference had been made to any criticism or complaints directed against JRA personally, and that the KPMG findings were no basis for fearing a claim against JRA or indeed any claim at all based upon poor advice as distinct from poor recording .
They continued:\r\n   \t"Assuming that your clients intend to complete a review of the kind described by LAUTRO in their letter, when and if they identify particular client cases which give rise to concern and in respect of which a claim may be made against them, it would then be the appropriate point at which to notify the insurers concerned, to enable the latter to give consideration to those cases. .
\tWhen the TSW letter of 27 January 1994 was sent, within a few days of the end of the period of the then current year\'s policies, JRA had already completed a new proposal form for the following year\'s PII cover .
This was effected through different brokers, as there had been dissatisfaction with JRA\'s previous brokers leading to a change .
The new proposal was in fact dated 21 January 1994, six days before the TSW letter .
At the end of the proposal JRA added two items of "Additional Information ... that we believe to be material to this application", the first of which was:\r\n   \t"We have notified our existing PII underwriters of circumstances that may give rise to a claim in respect of the transfer of Pension rights from Occupational Schemes to J Rothschild Personal Pension Plans: the fact that the Securities Investment Board has given notice of its intention to require all life companies to review all such business transacted by them .
Accordingly details of all such cases transacted in 1992/93 have been supplied and reviews are currently underway. .
\tI infer that the TSW letter had been under discussion for a little time, even though in the event it was delayed for a few days more .
On behalf of the underwriters, Mr Kealey speculated that the notification to underwriters was itself a reaction to the following year insurers\' unhappiness at undertaking responsibility for past pension mis-selling .
Indeed Mr Kealey was prepared to infer that with new brokers in the saddle the new insurers were saying - "Not in our policy! .
He submitted, however, that the nature of any such discussions or negotiations was irrelevant to the issues before me, even if the prospective new insurers were threatening to exclude past pension mis-selling or to weight the premium.\r\n   \tOn 28 February 1994 SIB issued an interim progress report on the steps it was taking to implement its review .
After referring to the development of recommendations regarding safeguards for future business, the interim report turned to "Remedial action" and outlined a timetable for SROs to issue guidance to their members on which categories of pension transfer cases they must actively reconsider as a matter of priority and as to what members would be expected to do by way of providing remedies for past inadequate advice.\r\n   \tIn April 1994 Caryn Putney started work at JRA as pensions review manager, having been recruited specifically to respond to the need to investigate past transfers in the light of the KPMG report and the SIB review.\r\n   \tIn May 1994 SIB circulated its paper called "Past Pension Transfers and Opt Outs: Model Guidance on Priority Cases and Complaints" .
The model guidance outlined in the paper was directed both at SROs, as being the medium through which the formal regulation would be conducted, and at SRO membership "to indicate what they should start doing now", viz to make progress on preparing for future but already flagged requirements.\r\n   \tIn October 1994 SIB published its "Review of Past Business", which contained a programme for the review of transfers and opt-outs by the industry .
In para 1 of the Summary SIB stated that:\r\n   \t"The Statement indicates how SIB expects the front line regulators, the SROs and the RPBs Recognised Professional Bodies, to ensure that their members who undertook such business review past cases, and make redress if it is due .
SIB is satisfied from all the information it has that some of the business was done in a materially non-compliant way, and that some of the investors concerned will be found to have suffered loss as result of unsuitable advice. .
\tIt was contemplated that the review of past business would take firms at least two years to complete substantially and for that reason certain classes of case were to be prioritised .
As is well known, the industry has been criticised for taking too long on the process, but it may be that the problems have turned out to be even larger than envisaged .
The Summary continued -\r\n   \t"The aim of the redress programme is to offer recompense to investors who have been disadvantaged as a result of bad advice...Investment firms should provide the redress themselves...The relationship between the review and redress process and firms\' obligations under their professional indemnity insurance is important: the proposals are intended to cause no risk to firms of jeopardising their PI cover..." \tThe aim of the review programme was to provide proper redress where it was due without recourse to the courts .
Entitlement to redress was to depend on there being a loss, actual or prospective, which had been caused by a firm\'s material contravention of an applicable regulatory requirement.\r\n   \tThe review process was divided into a number of stages - identification of the cases in question, fact gathering, compliance assessment, loss assessment and the provision of redress where due .
Redress was only to be regarded as due where the review found that there had been fault (ie a breach of rules), loss, and causation - a classical analysis .
The assessment of compliance was to be addressed through four essential tests which reflected the regulatory regime: know your customer and suitability, understanding of risk, adequate information, and misleading statements.\r\n   \tAs for redress, it was anticipated that this could be achieved by reinstatement in occupational schemes and/or by topping up of personal pensions - at the cost of the non-compliant firm.\r\n   \tAt paras 39/42 there appeared on PII cover which the underwriters have relied on .
It contained the following advice:\r\n   \t"Typically, PI policies require the insurers to be given immediate notice in writing of an occurrence which may subsequently give rise to a claim .
Such notice may need to be given in the course of a case review, depending on what emerges .
Firms would be wise to consult their PI insurers at the outset, and certainly before agreeing to pay any charges for obtaining information .
When notice is given, the insurer can give the firm directions on the subsequent handling of the case..." SIB indicated it was developing a model questionnaire to be used by firms to help them identify priority cases of opt-outs and non-joiners .
This was issued in December 1994 .
\tThe stage had now been reached where the SROs had to take over from SIB\'s preliminary work in implementing the regulatory regime proposed by SIB .
In December 1994 PIA (the successor of Lautro) issued a consultative paper broadly indicating that it would follow SIB guidance .
In February 1995 PIA published a Statement of PIA\'s Policy .
That Statement referred to new rules enacted by PIA which for the first time empowered PIA to require members to review their past business (see below) .
It also annexed model letters for sending out to investors .
This Statement was followed in April 1995 by PIA\'s Guidance for review of opt-outs and non-joiners and in July 1995 by its Guidance for review of transfers.\r\n   \tThe new rules just referred to were Rules 7.2.2/3, which provided as follows:\r\n   \t"7.2.2  (1)\tWhere it appears to PIA that it is necessary or desirable in the interests of investors, PIA may require a Member (or a class of Members) to carry out a review of any aspect of its investment business with a view to determining whether redress should be offered to any investor who has suffered loss or damage as a result of a failure by the Member to comply with its relevant duties .
\t\t(2)\tPIA may prescribe the standards and a specification for the conduct of any such review .
\t\t(3)\tA Member to whom any such requirement applies shall take all reasonable steps to carry out a review of its investment business in accordance with such standards and specification as PIA may prescribe .
\t"7.2.3\t\tWhere a Member employs an appointed representative which has conducted investment business of a kind which is the subject of a requirement under Rule 7.2.2 above, the Member shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the representative conducts a review of that business in accordance with any standards or specification as PIA may prescribe .
\t\t\t" Guidance: It is not PIA\'s intention that Members should under Rule 7.2.3 assume any legal responsibility in respect of any liabilities which appointed representative firms may have incurred toward customers in respect of investment business which they conducted prior to becoming a representative of a Member. .
\tHaving resolved to require its members to carry out the review of transfer and opt-out business implemented in its Guidance papers, with effect from their dates of publication, the PIA was now entitled to enforce its rule in contract, and JRA were formally obliged to carry out the review as required .
In the meantime, they had of course been guided by the various SIB publications to set in place substantial preparations for that review.\r\n   \tThere were many other papers issued by SIB and PIA over the course of the next few years defining, refining and seeking to simplify the review which member firms were undertaking, but I do not think that I need go into the details of them .
It will already have appeared that the essence of the process which SIB, through Lautro/PIA, required to be conducted was the identification of transfer and opt-out investors who had suffered or would suffer loss as a result of breaches of the regulatory code of conduct governing the selling of pensions to them, and the offering of compensation, called "redress", to them .
The process was designed to make amends, to safeguard the reputation of the industry for the future, and to avoid the need for a multiplication of law-suits, with their attendant anxieties and costs .
As is common knowledge, the process received widespread publicity.\r\n   JRA\'s review \tI shall indicate the course of JRA\'s review of its past transfer and opt-out business by reference to six of the sample cases whose documentation is before me .
The details concerning non-compliance or the calculation of the compensation offered to investors does not, for present purposes, matter .
All that is necessary is what suffices to illustrate the background to the issues with which I am concerned.\r\n   \tThe earliest evidence in the sample cases before me (I have been asked to look at only six out of the original ten sample cases) of contact being made with an investor by JRA is in the case Mr Mowbray sample 6), to whom JRA wrote on 19 December 1994 .
That would be after SIB\'s October 1994 guidance as to how firms should undertake their reviews, but before PIA\'s 1995 guidance and requirements .
I would imagine that this was something of a standard letter .
It read as follows:\r\n   \t"As I expect you are aware, concern about investors, such as yourself, who have chosen to transfer deferred pension benefits from occupational pension schemes into personal pensions has led to the regulators of the financial services industry imposing an industry wide review of such cases .
\t"The aim of the review is to identify whether or not advice given to clients was right for them at the time it was given .
If the advice was demonstrably not right and a financial loss has been suffered as a result of the advice, then some form of redress may be necessary .
\t"The Securities and Investments Board (SIB) have published detailed guidelines laying out exactly how this review is to be carried out .
\t"In fact we have already carried out extensive internal reviews and have satisfied ourselves that, in our view, the majority of our investors have been given "best advice" .
Nevertheless, you will appreciate that we are now following SIB guidelines... \t"Your case falls into the top priority as defined by SIB .
Consequently we hope to review your case as soon as possible .
However, I should point out that it may be some time before we are able to contact you again .
\t"SIB have published a factsheet giving details of the review; I enclose a copy of this .
\t"Please be reassured that your case will be reviewed and that I will contact you again as soon as possible. .
\tI do not know on what basis JRA said that they had satisfied themselves that the majority of their investors had been given best advice .
Certainly, by February 1995 in its Statement of Policy PIA had made it clear that they expected very few, if any, sales to pass the compliance assessment .
Moreover, in her evidence Mrs Putney said that she believed that most firms had automatically conceded non-compliance for all cases, and that whereas JRA had been assessing compliance, their experience was that only a negligible numbers of cases passed such assessment .
I recognise that a case may be non-compliant (for instance because of lack of proper recording), and yet best advice may have been given .
But it is hard to see how JRA could be satisfied of the latter in the absence of proper recording; and my understanding therefore is that non-compliance in this part of Mrs Putney\'s evidence meant that a case was treated as substantively and not merely formally defective.\r\n   \tJRA wrote to Mr Mowbray again on 7 April 1995 enclosing two questionnaires for him to complete .
This was an error, since both questionnaires were designed for occupational pension schemes to respond to .
This was still before PIA had issued its detailed guidance concerning transfers .
In the result JRA wrote to the occupational scheme involved in December 1995 and spent the next fifteen months chasing for an answer .
JRA does not appear to have got back to Mr Mowbray until later in 1997, when an offer of redress was made and accepted (see below).\r\n   \tIn September 1995 a questionnaire entitled "Pensions Review Form" in the model form originally developed by SIB and finally required by PIA was sent to opt-out (including non-joiner) investors under a model letter which stated as follows: The model letters are not in the files before me in certain cases, but I regard it as likely that they were sent.\r\n   \t"REVIEW OF PERSONAL PENSIONS \t"The investment watchdog which oversees investment firms, The Personal Investment Authority, is looking to see whether some people may have been badly advised to leave or not to join an employer\'s pension scheme, and take out a personal pension plan instead .
Where that advice did not meet the relevant standards and has resulted in loss to the customer, compensation may be due .
\t"The Personal Investment Authority has asked all firms who sell personal pension plans to look at the pension arrangements of some of their customers .
So that we can find out whether we need to look at your pension arrangement, we are asking you to complete the enclosed form .
\t"This may be important for you even if: \t*\tyou have now stopped your personal pension plan; or \t*\tyou feel you received good advice .
\t"Please could you fill in the form and return it in the prepaid envelope .
We will write to you again to let you know whether or not there may be a problem at this stage .
We cannot do this if you do not return your form. .
\tMrs Heafield (sample 3), returned her questionnaire very promptly, and Mr Lock (sample 9) after three months .
In both cases offers of redress were made and accepted in 1997/8 .
I am not concerned here with the reasons for the delay .
\tA similar covering letter was sent in the case of a transfer investor, for instance to Mr Malcolm (sample 10) on 5 August 1996 .
I am not sure that that letter was in model form, but the essence of it was to state that concern about cases of transfer had led to an industry wide review and that:\r\n   \t"The aim of the review is to identify whether or not advice given to clients was right for them at the time it was given .
If the advice was demonstrably not right and a financial loss has been suffered as a result of the advice, then some form of redress may be necessary. .
\tIn the case of Mr Malcolm no questionnaire or model "Transfer Review Form" seems to have been sent to him .
This was perhaps because JRA had already reviewed his case by reference to information obtained from his occupational scheme .
At any rate Mrs Putney assessed his case as non-compliant and as requiring redress without needing further information from him .
In due course an offer of redress was made and accepted in 1997.\r\n   \tThe case of Mrs Kendle (sample 4), another opt-out (non-joiner), is the only one of the six cases I am considering where underwriters have admitted there was a "claim ... made" by her .
Mrs Kendle stands out from the other investors for her understanding and assertiveness .
In early 1988 (even before the commencement of the Act and therefore outside the remit of its regulatory scheme or the SIB/PIA review) she bought an Allied Dunbar PPP from a Mr Gamble, then an independent financial adviser, and in April 1992, after he had become an appointed representative of JRA, she topped up with a JRA PPP .
In August 1994 Mrs Kendle wrote to JRA (to whom her original letter to Mr Gamble\'s company had been copied) to complain about the advice he had given her in 1988, saying that she intended to seek "redress" .
Her letter appears to have been well informed by the regulatory publications which had been issued by that time .
By January 1995 she had consulted solicitors who wrote to Mr Gamble to complain about both his 1988 and 1992 advice .
Mr Gamble passed this letter to JRA who told Mrs Kendle that they would deal with the matter as part of their review .
Thus in September 1995 she was sent and promptly returned a pensions review questionnaire .
In 1997 JRA offered her redress for the bad advice given in 1992 (ie Mr Gamble\'s failure to advise her to rejoin her NHS scheme), redress which she accepted, but not before her solicitors had entered into correspondence with JRA even to the extent of enclosing draft points of claim.\r\n   \tIn the last of the six cases, the opt-out case of Mr Harwood, who had died in 1994, no direct contact appears to have been made between JRA and his widow at any time (sample 2) .
This is presumably because this case does not concern a JRA PPP, but a National Mutual plan sold by an appointed representative prior to his joining JRA .
The case was therefore originally included as a sample case for the sake of an example of a claim on underwriters falling within the retroactive provisions of the policies (see Special Memorandum 1(d)) .
In December 1995 PIA issued further guidance relating to the monitoring of appointed representatives undertaking pension review work: PIA required members to ensure that such reviews were promptly and properly undertaken .
There is an internal JRA memorandum dated 31 October 1997 which states in part -\r\n   \t"At the moment as far as I can see, the widow is unaware of this shortfall and Andy Cameron has yet to discuss this with her .
This is despite the fact that death took place some three years ago on 23 August 1994. .
It would seem that it was not until 10 December 1997 that Mr Cameron, the appointed representative in question, visited and first informed Mrs Harwood that there was anything amiss .
His fax to JRA of that date says:\r\n   \t"Following your advice, I visited Mrs S Harwood today and informed her that we have identified that she has a shortfall of pension income due to the decision to opt out of the C&G scheme, and that we are in the throws of sorting this out for her, and that it could take up to some months before she was recompensed .
I did not enter into any specific details or apportion any blame .
\t"She was delighted to hear the news, but stated that she hoped that this would cause me no problems! .
\tAn offer of redress was finally made by Mr Cameron to Mrs Harwood by letter dated 17 April 1998, which she accepted on 7 May 1998 .
The agreed redress requires Mr Cameron to purchase an annuity of \xc2\xa38,490 pa, increasing in line with RPI .
One quotation for this, already out of date and lapsed, was in the sum of over \xc2\xa3220,000 .
JRA are planning to lend the cost to Mr Cameron to enable him to make this redress .
This is the single largest claim on underwriters of which I am aware.\r\n   \tWhen in 1997 or 1998 JRA\'s (or in sample 2 Mr Cameron\'s) offers of redress were made and accepted, the correspondence took the following form .
Although there appears to have been no prescriptive model letter in which the offer was made (eg, sometimes apologies were tendered for delay, and sometimes they were not), the letter would begin by explaining that the review of the investor\'s pension had now been completed and that JRA wished to make an "Offer of Redress" which was designed to put the investor in the same position as he might have been expected to be in if he had not transferred his accrued benefits (in the case of transfer) or if he had not left or failed to join an occupational scheme (in the case of opt-out) .
The mechanics of the redress were then explained, eg reinstatement where that was possible .
There then followed a passage under the rubric of either "Summary of Offer of Redress" or "How you can accept this offer", which invited the investor, if he had first satisfied himself that the offer was satisfactory, to complete and return either an enclosed acceptance letter or an enclosed copy of the offer letter to which was subscribed a simple formula essentially in the form of - "I, xyz, agree to accept the offer of ... as set out in this letter. .
However, either the offer letter or the acceptance letter or both typically made certain points regarding the offer being made without admission of liability, in full and final settlement, and regarding acceptance as preventing the making of "any further claim".\r\n   \tThus, in the case of Mrs Heafield (sample 3), JRA wrote:\r\n   \t"The above offer is made without any admission of liability on our part and represents full and final settlement in respect of [JRA\'s review of your PPP] ... \t"If you decide to accept the Offer of Redress please complete and return the enclosed offer acceptance letter in the prepaid envelope .
Completing and returning it prevents you from making any further claim against J Rothschild Assurance in respect of this matter. .
The enclosed acceptance letter, which Mrs Heafield signed and returned, read: \t"My acceptance of these terms is in full and final settlement of all claims that I have or may have against J Rothschild Assurance plc or any of its employees or appointed representatives in connection with ..." etc .
\t"Please proceed to act upon your offer, the terms of which are set out in your letter ..." \tIn the case of Mrs Kendle (sample 4) the offer letter stated, to the same effect, but in slightly different language:\r\n   \t"Please confirm you would like us to go ahead with reinstating you into the National Health Pension Scheme by completing and returning the enclosed offer acceptance letter in the prepaid envelope .
Completing this letter and returning it prevents you from making any further claim against J Rothschild Assurance in respect of this matter ... \t"Finally, although J Rothschild Assurance agree to provide the redress offered, if you accept the offer in the manner specified, this offer does not constitute an admission of legal liability on the part of J Rothschild Assurance. .
Her acceptance letter was in the same form as in the case of sample 3 .
\tIn the case of Mr Mowbray (sample 6) the offer letter simply said: \t"Please confirm which option you would like by completing, signing and returning the enclosed attached copy of this letter ... \t"Completing this letter and returning it prevents you from making any further claim against J Rothschild Assurance and/or our advisor apparently a reference to the appointed representative concerned .
in respect of this matter. .
\tIn the case of Mr Lock (sample 9) the paper-work was in essentially identical form to that of sample 6 .
In the case of Mr Malcolm (sample 10) the paper-work was in essentially identical form to that of sample 4.\r\n   \tThe case of Mrs Harwood (sample 2) was somewhat different as the offer letter there was prepared and sent by Mr Cameron .
He wrote:\r\n   \t"I would like to obtain your agreement to my proposal, which although made without any admission of liability, will then legally commit me to an agreed course of action ... \t"In return for my commitment to this course of action, I will ask you to agree that the offer of redress made in this letter is made without admission of liability and that any redress given under this letter, when carried out, will be in full and final settlement of any claim that you may have against myself arising out of the advice given in respect of the above Plan. .
\tAs for the underwriters, they had been kept informed through their agents and latterly their solicitors of the course of JRA\'s review, eg by means of copies of JRA\'s monthly review reports to PIA .
On 26 April 1995 JRA had sought the underwriter\'s guidance or comments as to how they should carry out the review required by PIA .
On 11 May 1995 the underwriters replied, by their agents, that they denied liability and left JRA to act as they considered appropriate in following the PIA guidelines .
Intended offers of redress were notified in advance for underwriters\' approval, but elicited the standard response that liability was denied .
By October 1997 JRA was giving only one day\'s notice of the sending out of an offer letter .
Ultimately a modus vivendi was arranged whereby the positions of the parties would be taken as set out in the pleadings and a summary of offers was to be sent monthly in arrears.\r\n   \tIn the light of the material set out above, I now turn to deal with the five issues debated before me.\r\n   Issue 1, the notification issue .
\tOn behalf of underwriters Mr Kealey submitted that the TSW letter of 27 January 1994 was invalid as a purported notice under General Condition 2 ("GC2") .
He emphasised that the term, where it applied, afforded to the assured a valuable benefit in extending into the future the right to be indemnified by claims made subsequent to the original period of insurance but arising out of the notified circumstances .
It followed, he argued, that the benefit should not be abused by an assured\'s attempt to seek spurious protection for the future where present circumstances did not justify the giving of a notice .
The words "any circumstance of which THE ASSURED shall become aware" required some new knowledge on the part of JRA .
The words "which may give rise to a claim" laid down an objective test, which required that there must be a real, or material, risk, something more than a de minimis risk, something more than a negligible, fanciful or speculative risk, that the circumstance notified may lead to a claim .
Neither the KPMG report nor Lautro\'s letter in reaction to it justified the view that JRA had become aware of anything new which could objectively and reasonably be said to amount to such a risk .
All that had been identified was a possible problem .
The statistical risk that each year\'s pension selling might ultimately give rise to claims was nothing new, and the KPMG report was merely further statistics .
In any event, it did not apply to JRA .
There was no evidence of any new knowledge on the part of JRA to suggest that their appointed representatives were mis-selling pensions .
There was no evidence of any new knowledge on the part of JRA that their procedures for vetting opt-outs and transfers were not working .
The fact that competitors carrying on business in the same market might be susceptible to criticism in certain cases in which they, but not JRA, had been involved was irrelevant.\r\n   \tIt might have been different if or as and when JRA had conducted an investigation into their own files and discovered mis-selling there .
That was the view of SIB itself in the guidance it wrote regarding PII cover in its October 1994 report (quoted above), viz -\r\n   \t"Such notice may need to be given in the course of a case review, depending on what emerges ..." \tIn the meantime, JRA appear to have been confident in their own procedures: witness the fact that transfers appear to have been effected in the period between the KPMG report and the TSW letter, also what JRA wrote to Mr Mowbray on 19 December 1994, viz\r\n   \t"we have already carried out extensive internal reviews and have satisfied ourselves that, in our view, the majority of our investors have been given "best advice" ..." Moreover, JRA were not moved to give notice by prior warnings, such as Lautro\'s Enforcement Bulletin 14, which spoke of "the potential problem", or EB16, which spoke to "the size of the overall problem" .
It was probable, therefore, that the notice of 27 January 1994, coming as it did more than a month after Lautro\'s letter of 22 December 1993, but only a few days before the end of the current period of insurance and only a few days after the completion of a proposal form for the next year\'s cover, was a tactical reaction to difficulties experienced in obtaining the next year\'s cover rather than a genuine reaction to the KPMG report and Lautro\'s letter .
In this connection, it was significant that there had been no witness from JRA to speak to the origins of the TSW letter .
\tIn my judgment, however, these submissions were not persuasive .
While it is true that GC2 gives to an assured a significant extension of cover, a "claims made" policy could hardly work on any other basis .
Otherwise, by the time that a claim came to be made, it is quite likely that it would have become impossible to obtain cover for it, either at all or on any but prohibitive terms .
Therefore as or more significant than the extension of cover itself are the factors first, that the test of materiality for notice is a weak one - "which  may  give rise to a claim", not "which  is likely to  give rise to a claim; and secondly, that the price of the extension of cover is notification of such circumstances, which is a condition precedent to a right to be indemnified .
That latter factor is important, for, together with the additional requirement that the assured shall give underwriters "as soon as possible full details in writing of the circumstances which may give rise to a claim", it enables underwriters to adopt or require such immediate steps as they think appropriate to minimise or avert any potential loss .
I do not think, therefore, that there is any justification for demanding too much of the test that the notified circumstance "may" give rise to a claim .
In this connection, it is noticeable, albeit it remains at root a forensic point, that in the agents\' letter rejecting the notification the error was made of misstating the test when they said:\r\n   \t"Your letter appears to rely heavily upon a study undertaken by KPMG Peat Marwick in December 1993 as containing a finding that there was no "evidence of substantial compliance" with the LAUTRO Rules in 91% of cases considered .
On what basis is it contended by your clients that such a finding  is likely to  give rise to a claim against them or any one of them? .
[emphasis added] And yet it seems to me that the fact that 91% of files examined by KPMG were found to be non-compliant did mean that it was at least possible that equivalent non-compliance would give rise to claims against JRA themselves .
After all, the KPMG study was on a significant number of files, 735 of them, representing over 400 different occupational schemes, and so selected as, in the words of the report\'s executive summary - \t"to cover a representative sample of firms undertaking transfer business ..." \tMoreover, KPMG found that even after the issue of regulatory guidance on pension transfers the percentage of compliant files rose only to 80% .
It was true, as the report itself emphasised, that the non-compliance might be in the matter of recording the advice rather than in the advising itself; and that non-compliance by itself did not mean loss .
But even so, it was realistic of Lautro to see in such figures, as the Lautro letter said, "a problem which needs to be tackled", and tackled, as that same letter pointed out, inter alia by establishing "what the cost of rectification will be" .
Lautro therefore showed that it was anticipating, and would be requiring, compensation to remedy the problem.\r\n   \tIn this connection I believe that it is legitimate to test a view of what the future may bring, where that view has been contemporaneously and prophetically expressed, against what happened in due course .
I do not mean, of course, that hindsight can be used to justify an unreasonable position: but, as Lord Sumner said, in the context of the doctrine of frustration, in Bank Line Limited v. Arthur Capel and Company  [1919] AC 435  at 454:\r\n   \t"The question must be considered at the trial as it had to be considered by the parties, when they came to know of the cause and the probabilities of the delay and had to decide what to do .
On this the judgments in the above cases substantially agree .
Rights ought not to be left in suspense or to hang on the chances of subsequent events .
The contract binds or it does not bind, and the law ought to be that the parties can gather their fate then and there .
What happens afterwards may assist in showing what the probabilities really were, if they had been reasonably forecasted, but when the causes of frustration have operated so long or under such circumstances as to raise a presumption of inordinate delay, the time has come at which the fate of the contract falls to be decided. .
\tIn this case, the future showed that JRA were more than justified in saying that there were circumstances which might give rise to a claim against them in the identification of the problems which KPMG had reported on and which SIB had provisionally determined would have to lead to a review of past business and the provision of financial remedies .
Where a prediction based not only on objective evidence which has itself been under scrutiny by independent professionals, but also on the concern of regulatory authorities, turns out to have been entirely justified by events, it seems to me to be unrealistic to say that that prediction was invalid and unjustified merely because there was much other evidence which was not yet to hand, even though that evidence was of particular relevance to an important aspect of the prediction .
This must be a fortiori the case where the prediction has to be not of what will be but only of what might be.\r\n   \tMr Kealey submitted that the notification was connected with JRA\'s difficulties in obtaining cover for the future year, and in this connection he pointed out that there was no evidence from those who were involved in the renewal and the decision to notify .
It seemed  to me that this submission rebounded on him, for in the course of it he was prepared to infer that the new insurers wished to exclude cover for claims arising out of the SIB review or to load premium rates, and to concede that at any rate exclusion would be relevant to the objective risk which might justify notification under the existing policies .
It seemed to me that in the light of the inference which Mr Kealey was himself prepared to make, which is likely to have been correct, it would be obvious that there was objective justification for JRA\'s notice.\r\n   \tFinally, I would point out that the Lautro letter not only stated that consideration would have to be given to "what the cost of rectification would be" and "the appropriate means of restoring the situation", but also that so many "complaints of significance" regarding transfers and opt-outs could be expected that, unless they were ring fenced and handled under separate arrangements, the normal complaints system would be likely to be "overwhelmed".\r\n   \tFor these reasons I hold that the TSW letter was a valid notification within the terms of GC2 .
Although only transfers were listed in the schedule to the letter, I regard the letter as covering opt-outs (including non-joiners) as well.\r\n   Issue 2, the non-disclosure issue .
\tMr Kealey submits that, if the TSW letter was a good notice, then it should follow that opt-outs claims are excluded from cover by Exclusion 2 by reason of JRA\'s knowledge of the contents of E16 .
He stresses that already in that document Lautro had said that the cases coming to its attention "understate the size of the overall problem" .
Moreover, whereas the KPMG report may have transformed SIB\'s, Lautro\'s and the industry\'s knowledge of non-compliance in connection with transfers, it did not add to their knowledge about opt-outs: but that did not stop SIB including opt-outs in its call for a review.\r\n   \tMr Symons has two answers to this .
First, on the facts he submits that EB16 was different from the KPMG report and the reactions then engendered: it was primarily concerned with providing guidance for future sales .
In as much as it called for "a special monitoring exercise" as respects existing investors, that exercise was limited to PPPs which during the third quarter of 1992 had been terminated or made paid up by investors within two years of purchase .
JRA\'s own exercise merely showed that there were no such PPPs in their own as then short history .
Secondly, as a matter of construction he submits that the last line of Exclusion 2 ("or which were known to THE ASSURED prior to the inception of this Policy") and the Special Conditions are inconsistent with one another, in that the latter purport to cover, albeit limited to the amount and extent of the previous year\'s insurance, what the former seeks to exclude - with the result that the exclusion must make way for the express inclusion.\r\n   \tOn the facts, I agree with Mr Symons\' first submission .
The position as at the time of EB16 was that the case of opt-outs was causing some concern, but the extent of the problem had not yet even been probed .
It was like the situation in the case of transfers before the study conducted and reported on by KPMG .
So it was that in EB16 Laurto called for its members to conduct the limited monitoring exercise spoken of above .
In JRA\'s case, this exercise produced a nil return .
JRA would have been entitled to take account of that nil return and also in that connection the introductory language of EB16 to the effect that members should not assume that Lautro\'s views went beyond particular cases so as to be necessarily applicable to each member\'s own circumstances .
In the case of other members, however, it would seem that this monitoring exercise was disturbing, because in the Lautro letter of 22 December 1993 Lautro referred to a "study of opt-out business carried out earlier by Lautro" as one of the bases of its concern that there was a problem "which needs to be tackled": which can have been a reference only to the monitoring exercise called for in EB16 .
In my judgment, I do not think that it can be said that the opt-out cases which JRA have finally been called upon to remedy arose from "any circumstances or occurrence which ... were known to" JRA prior to inception of the policies.\r\n   \tThe question of construction is more complex .
Mr Kealey submits that the two clauses are not inconsistent in that Special Condition 2 is only dealing with "a claim first made ... during the period of this insurance" .
Therefore it did not apply at all to claims which only came within the cover by reason of the deeming provision in GC2 .
Mr Symons submits, to the contrary, that by reason of the deeming provision in GC2 ("shall be deemed ... to have been made during the subsistence hereof"), any relevant claim first made will be made during the period of the insurance; and that if it was otherwise there would be a gap in cover, whereby claims within the extended period were not covered, but claims within the defined year were, even though they arose out of the same notified circumstances.\r\n   \tIn my judgment, even if the opt-out problem had been a circumstance known to JRA by reason of EB16, I do not agree with Mr Kealey that Exclusion 2 would apply to exclude cover .
The Exclusions state that the policy "shall not indemnify" where they operate, viz where the circumstances which have given rise to a claim "were known" prior to inception .
Special Condition 2, on the other hand, states that even "where (1) [the assureds] had previous knowledge of the circumstances which could give rise to such a claim and (2) they should have notified" them under a preceding insurance, then underwriters "shall only be liable to afford indemnity" to the extent and amount of the preceding insurance .
It follows that under Special Condition 2, there will be cover to the extent of cover in the previous year .
That is simply inconsistent with a view of Exclusion 2 that would simply deny cover in all cases of knowledge prior to inception of circumstances which have given rise to a claim .
The whole logic of the Special Conditions is that underwriters can only avoid the policy for non-disclosure etc in the case of fraudulent intent (with the burden being on the assured to disprove such intent) .
It would run entirely counter to such logic if, irrespective of fraudulent intent, the underwriters could deny cover for non-disclosure etc of matters known before inception .
And what if the circumstances known to the assured prior to inception were also known to underwriters .
Why then should there be no cover .
The logic of Exclusion 2 should, if possible, make sense with the rest of the policy.\r\n   \tThere are it seems to me two possible approaches to this problem .
There is the approach reflected in Mr Symons\' submission that, in the case of inconsistency, the exclusion must make way for the inclusion .
There is, however, the alternative approach of asking whether the exclusion can be given some more limited scope, so as not to be in head-long inconsistency with Special Condition 2 .
The latter approach is to my mind more satisfactory, if it is open .
In this connection I am inclined to think that Exclusion 2 is intended to apply in circumstances where there is fraudulent intent, or strictly speaking where the assured has been unable to establish to underwriter\'s satisfaction that a non-disclosure, misrepresentation or untrue statement was free of any fraudulent intent, but where underwriters do not wish to avoid the whole policy .
Nevertheless, they wish to be free to refuse to indemnify the assured in the case of claims arising out of the non-disclosure of circumstances known to the assured prior to inception and which have led to claims being made during the period of the policy .
So limited, the last line of Exclusion 2 makes sense .
It is part of the non-disclosure code of the policy .
If there is a waiver of such non-disclosure, the exclusion does not operate .
But if there is no fraudulent intent, the Special Conditions prevail, which is to say that not only is there no right of avoidance (Special Condition 1), but there is a guarantee of cover limited to the cover of a preceding insurance (Special Condition 2) .
It follows that, if there was no cover in the previous year, Special Condition 2 cannot apply, for then neither hypothesis (2) within it nor the limitation to the previous year\'s cover, can operate .
In the present case, however, there was insurance in the preceding year.\r\n   \tIt seems to me that this is a satisfactory way of doing justice to all the terms of the policies .
There is no suggestion of any fraudulent intent in the non-disclosure of EB16 prior to the policies\' inception, so that Exclusion 2 is irrelevant .
If, however, this interpretation is unsound, then I would be prepared to agree with Mr Symons that the last line of Exclusion 2 must make way for Special Condition 2 .
It is after all a  Special  Condition.\r\n   \tTherefore, in my judgment the underwriters\' reliance on Exclusion 2 for the purpose of seeking to exclude cover for any opt-out claim fails both on the facts and on the construction of the policies.\r\n   Issue 3, the claims issue .
\tThere is perhaps the most fundamental of the underwriters\' defences .
It is an intriguing issue because my narrative of the process of review will have indicated that this was a situation where the industry went out to uncover non-compliance and to volunteer recompense, rather than the more normal situation where an assured awaits claims to which he is then forced to respond.\r\n   \tI do not think that the underwriters say that the mere fact that JRA volunteered investigation and recompense ipso facto prevents there being cover under the policies .
They certainly do not avail themselves of the requirement of their written consent for the incurring of costs in the defence or settlement of claims under Insuring Clause 4 .
But they do submit that "claims made" policies such as these are simply not designed to respond to such situations.\r\n   \tMr Kealey points out that whereas a "claim" might in certain circumstances mean no more than a mere right of action ( eg  "Do I have a claim? .
"Yes"), juxtaposed as it is in these policies with the word "made" it requires the assertion of a claim .
Thus in Re St Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co and Guardian Insurance Co of Canada [1983] 1 DLR (4th) 342, the Ontario court of appeal held that the bringing of a suit, without service or any notice of its issue, while constituting a "suit brought", did not constitute a "claim made" (Goodman JA dissenting on the latter point) .
At 352/3 Thorson JA (with whom Houlden JA agreed) said:\r\n   \t"Clearly the expression "claim made" is broader than "suit brought" since a claim can be made in any of a number of ways without the institution of an action .
My brother Goodman accepts that this is so but answers that, where an action has been commenced by the issue of a writ, the consequence in law of the writ\'s issue is that the claim must be taken as having been made at that time, on the common law principle that the defendant must be deemed to have notice of it at that time .
\t"With great respect I am unable to agree that this is a correct statement of the law as it applies in this province ... At 355 Thorson JA continued: \t"Until such time as the write is served on, or the existence of the claim is otherwise brought to the attention of, the other party, what does it avail to say that as a matter of law he has "made a claim" against the other party of which the latter must be deemed to have notice .
How does it accord with any reality to view him, as a matter of law, as having made such a claim at the time the writ was issued, even though that time has passed, the writ has been put away unserved in a file in his solicitor\'s office, its very existence is unknown to the other party and he himself has not decided whether the matter should go any further? .
\tIt is to be noted that even Goodman JA founded his minority holding of "claim made" on the basis that notice had been given to the world at large .
He also said (at 349): \t"A claim, other than one made by way of the institution of legal proceedings, can only be made by notifying the person against whom the claim is being asserted of such claim .
Prior to the giving of such notice, there can only be an intention to make a claim. .
\tIn Thorman v. New Hampshire Insurance Co (UK) Ltd [1988] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 7 complaints were made in 1976 against the plaintiff architects regarding cracking of brickwork .
In June 1982 the architects\' client claimed arbitration, saying "Serious problems have arisen ... inter alia with regard to cracking and defective brickwork", and in the same month he commenced proceedings by issuing a generally endorsed writ .
Notice of the intention to issue that writ for limitation purposes was given to the architects, and the architects in turn gave notice of the issue of the writ against them to their insurers, but the writ was not ultimately served until December 1983 .
A statement of claim followed in January 1984 which pleaded a variety of defects going beyond the complaints regarding brickwork .
The architects were insured by yearly policies up to 30 September 1983, so that service of the writ and of the statement of claim was outside the period of the policy .
The defendant insurers said that the only "claim made" during the period of the policy was in respect of the complaints about the brickwork .
At first instance Steyn J held that the architects were only covered for the claim regarding defective brickwork.\r\n   \tStocker LJ and Russell LJ regarded the issue of the writ together with notice to the architects of its issue as a claim made embracing all matters subsequently particularised: see at 17 and 18 .
Sir John Donaldson MR was inclined to agree, but was concerned by the objection that notice of the issue of the writ was\r\n   \t"more accurately to be regarded as notice of an intention to make a claim at a later date by serving the writ" (at 12) .
Stocker LJ in the course of his judgment at 15 referred to Steyn J\'s adoption of what Devlin J had said in West Wake Price & Co v. Ching [1956] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 618 at 627:\r\n   \t"I think that the primary meaning of the word "claim" - whether used in a popular sense or in a strict legal sense - is such as to attach itself to the object that is claimed; it is not the same thing as a cause of action by which the claim may be supported or as the grounds on which it may be based .
In the Oxford Dictionary "claim" is defined as, first, "A demand for something as due; an assertion of a right to something" ..." Stocker LJ went on, however, to say: \t"For my part, these appear to me to be definitions which can be accepted without further refinement .
They do not, however, solve the question since the application of the definition may vary according to the circumstances in which it falls to be construed ..." \tI too would accept, as I am probably in any event bound to do, that the words "claim ... made" require not only the assertion of a claim, of some remedy as due, but also the bringing of that assertion to the notice of the assured .
To echo Stocker LJ\'s words, however, that does not by itself solve the question.\r\n   \tThere was no submission before me that Lautro\'s requirement, under its new rule binding in contract upon its members, to conduct a review of past transfer and opt-out business, and to offer redress where it was found to be due, was itself a "claim ... made" .
It is therefore unnecessary for me to consider whether any such submission was in any event open to JRA on the pleadings .
The argument before me proceeded on the basis that the relevant claim or claims were those of the investors themselves .
Nor was it argued before me that the investors\' claims had been made on their behalf by means of Lautro\'s requirements .
If it had been, there would no doubt have been submissions about agency and so forth .
Nevertheless, it was submitted that the regulatory background was the context in which the issue had to be considered, and that these policies had been written with that regulatory background well in mind.\r\n   \tMr Symons submitted that the investors concerned had made claims by answering questionnaires and in any event by agreeing to the offers of redress in the terms in which such offers were made and accepted .
In particular, reliance was placed on the words (or their equivalents) -\r\n   \t"Completing this letter and returning it prevents you from making any further claim against J Rothschild Assurance in respect of this matter"; and also the language of full and final settlement .
He argued that it could hardly have made any difference whether or not JRA, in writing to their investors, had said: "Do you want to make a claim for redress? .
and received the answer "Yes" .
It therefore did not matter, could not and should not matter, whether an investor was more or less assertive .
\tMr Kealey on the other submitted that, save in the case of sample 4 (Mrs Kendle), there had simply been no assertion of any rights against JRA and that to find or manufacture such an assertion would be fundamentally to alter the risk being insured under a "claims made" policy .
In such a case, JRA\'s conduct of the review would cause underwriters to be insuring the settlement of contingent liabilities before any claim was made .
As for the suggestion that JRA could have asked their investors "Do you want to make a claim .
", that question, if it had been asked, would have given rise to questions as to whether under a "claims made" policy the solicitation of claims would have been in good faith .
In any event, the purpose of the review was the provision of compensation, not the solicitation of claims .
Participation in the review process was not the making of a claim.\r\n   \tTwo analogies were prayed in aid .
Mr Symons referred to a car manufacturer calling in cars for repair or redesign where it was discovered that the cars contained some fault .
It was recognised that such costs were covered under the manufacturer\'s liability policies .
However, Mr Kealey was able to say, and I accepted his statement for the purpose of the argument, that such cover was dealt with by special provision in product liability policies.\r\n   \tThe second analogy was utilised by Mr Kealey .
He pointed to the fact that in the Lloyd\'s R & R settlement each accepting name was asked to agree that his acceptance was in full and final settlement of all claims: but it was well known that there were both litigating names and non-litigating names, and that the settlement treated them in certain respects differently .
That illustrated the fact that it is one thing to settle a claim that you have made on full and final terms, and another thing to accept a settlement offered to you on full and final terms even though you have not made a claim, but perhaps might have done so .
I accept that distinction .
However, it did not seem to me that that analogy was helpful either, since even though there were certainly names who either had or had not made claims arising out of such matters as syndicate selection or the conduct of syndicate business, the Lloyd\'s settlement was designed not only to settle claims that had been or might have been made but also to charge every name an Equitas premium and to allow or charge every name credits or debts in respect of their syndicate reserves and liabilities .
Thus a name might well have received a payment under the settlement even though he had made no claim and was making no claim qua litigating name .
In the case of the SIB/Lautro review, however, the only settlements that were offered were those where the review had persuaded the reviewing member that there was a liability which ought to be remedied .
It is therefore easier to infer that the participating investor was laying claim to such compensation.\r\n   \tIt is interesting in this connection to consider sample 3 both for its own sake and by way of comparison with sample 4 .
It is accepted by underwriters that there was a claim in the case of sample 4, but they deny a claim in the case of sample 3 .
Sample 4 was the one where Mrs Kendle showed understanding and assertiveness and ultimately instructed solicitors to press her case .
Sample 3 shows the following .
In September 1995, Mrs Heafield, having been sent the model letter, with its reference to review of appropriate cases and its holding out of the possibility of compensation for bad advice, and its enclosed pensions review form questionnaire, returned the latter .
On 26 April 1996 JRA wrote to her to ask her to complete a different questionnaire and also to recommend that she join her NHS scheme without delay, because it was to her advantage to do so ("it is the view of our regulators that it is seldom "best advice" to opt out of, or not join, a defined occupational pension scheme") and because she had an obligation in law "to mitigate any loss you may have suffered" .
After some prompting, she was persuaded that she was better advised to do so, and therefore also asked for her PPP to be paid up .
Her understanding at this point appears to have been that she was owed by way of redress the monies paid to her PPP, and she wrote to ask for their reimbursement on 26 September 1996 .
On 8 November she wrote again in similar terms, complaining of no reply, and asking\r\n   \t"that I will soon receive the amount due to me. .
\tIn a letter dated 6 November 1996, which either crossed with her second request or was pre-dated to avoid embarrassment, JRA replied to point out that her PPP had not been cancelled but paid up and would continue to earn investment returns while her case was reviewed .
JRA wrote:\r\n   \t"As you are aware, we are reviewing the advice given to you to take out the PPP PRP was the acronym given by JRA to a JRA PPP .
in November 1993 .
If our review shows that you were not given "best advice" and that you have suffered a financial loss as a result, then we will offer you some form of compensation. .
\tOn 12 November 1996 JRA wrote again to say that their recent letters appear to have crossed and to express the hope that\r\n   \t"my letter answered your queries, but if it raises any further questions, please do not hesitate to contact me. .
Mrs Heafield appears to have been satisfied with JRA\'s explanation, for there is no further letter on file from her until her reply dated 3 July 1997 to JRA\'s offer of redress dated 20 June 1997 .
\tIn my judgment it is plain from this correspondence that Mrs Heafield\'s understanding of the review was not in the details of it but in the faith that her case would be reviewed, and that she would be compensated in due course if the review found that there had been fault on JRA\'s part to fail to give her best advice .
Was this a claim .
It seems to me that it was .
By returning the questionnaire in the light of the model letter, Mrs Heafield was asking JRA to take account of her case in their review and, if appropriate, to compensate her .
In any event, by asking JRA to pay her the redress offered on the basis that such payment would prevent any further claim .
Mrs Heafield was again making claim to use the review procedures to satisfy her loss.\r\n   \tUltimately, it seems to me that I have to take an overall view of the review process and the documentation which it engendered and ask myself whether claims had been made against JRA .
In my judgment the answer is to say that they had .
I think that the investors made claim on JRA by participating in the review process and/or in accepting the redress offered in the light of its terms .
I am persuaded that any other answer would do insufficient justice to the context of the regulatory regime as a whole .
If that regime made claiming easy, it was designed to do so, because that was the policy of the Act itself, because of regard for the complexities of the subject matter, for the sake of the good name of the industry, and because the alternative prospects of dealing with these matters in the courts was not to be contemplated .
It seems to me that JRA\'s underwriters were familiar with the regulatory regime and cannot complain that they are being asked to underwrite risks of a different nature from those they entered upon .
It could similarly be said that by delivering their cars to their dealers car owners are claiming to have those cars repaired in accordance with a car manufacturer\'s recall of them .
It is a matter of context .
Mr Kealey agreed that if JRA had asked "Do you wish to make a claim for compensation if our review shows you to have been badly advised" and the investor had said "Yes", there would have been a claim within the policies .
In my judgment that indicates that at root the underwriters\' argument is one that depends on excessive formality.\r\n   \tNevertheless, the case of Mrs Harwood in sample 2, should in my view for present purposes be left on one side .
This is in part because Mrs Harwood\'s case has certain unique features to it and in part because it seems to me that any claim is against Mr Cameron, and not JRA .
The unique features are that Mrs Harwood was not contacted about the review until 10 December 1997 and then the contact involved a personal meeting between Mr Cameron and Mrs Harwood .
Although I have Mr Cameron\'s brief report about that meeting (see above), I am uncertain whether it was made clear to Mrs Harwood that any blame or liability might even arguably have attached to him; her comment was to express the hope that Mr Cameron would be caused "no problems" .
Moreover, the final offer of compensation which she accepted is not much more illuminating .
In these circumstances it seems to me far more satisfactory that the issue of sample 2 should be left to proceedings which can bind Mr Cameron and the underwriters, which the present proceedings cannot do .
For these reasons, even though I cannot see any reason why sample 2 presents any idiosyncratic problems in relation to any of the other issues, apart from issue 5, I shall omit reference to it in any declaration for present purposes.\r\n   \tAs a postscript, I note that JRA did not rely on the words "or loss" in GC2 as an alternative to claims subsequently made .
This was because, correctly in my judgment, "loss" was viewed as reflecting Insuring Clause 2 which indemnifies JRA against loss sustained by reason of dishonest or fraudulent acts or omissions of directors and employees.\r\n   Issue 4, the costs issue .
\tOn the basis that issue 3 has been answered in favour of JRA, it follows that there may have been costs incurred in connection with such claims .
Even so, the underwriters submit that at most some modicum of cost incurred in connection with the final settlement of the claims can be recovered .
What JRA cannot recover, is the whole cost of conducting the review, a fortiori cannot recover the cost of reviewing cases which do not result in a settlement .
In any event, there have been no costs incurred in "defence" of such claims .
The much more ample indemnity for costs in the event of the discovery of fraud or dishonesty under Special Memorandum 4 is contrasted.\r\n   \tMr Symons was not disposed to take issue with many of these submissions, save to say that much work may be performed and costs incurred in anticipation of a claim, so as to achieve a better settlement, which will still remain costs incurred "in the settlement of any claim", even if not in its defence .
He gave the example of the investigation of an accident.\r\n   \tIn my judgment Mr Symons\' limited submission was well founded .
I do not think that costs were incurred in the defence of claims:  JRA were not in the business of defending any claims, but conceding them .
However, there always was an intention to settle .
That was the purpose of the review .
It does not seem to me to matter that the costs of settlement may have started to have been incurred when the claim was potential rather than actual .
Provided that in any case a claim has been made, then the costs of settling it, whether before or after it was made, are costs "incurred in the ... settlement of any claim which falls to be dealt with under this Policy".\r\n   \tI do not think that I can, or am expected to, perform any act of quantification .
It seems to me that in principle the identification of a particular case as non-compliant and the task of evaluating the cost of compensation should come within the indemnity of Insuring Clause 2.\r\n   Issue 5, the excess issue .
\tThe declaration sought by JRA under this heading asks that the relevant excess in respect of each claim is that of the appointed representative who sold the pension in question.\r\n   \tHowever, at present I can see no basis in the policies for saying that that is so.\r\n   \tThe appointed representatives are separately insured under individual policies (within the overall composite policies) in which there are provisions for separate excesses and limits .
Whether the position may change when and if the appointed representatives are joined as plaintiffs and show that they have themselves had claims made against them, is another question .
I also note that in the contract between JRA and their appointed representatives there appears the following provisions under the Misconduct clause 3.23:\r\n   \t"Failure to comply with the requirements of this Contract, including the SIB Principles and Rules, Lautro Rules and Code of Conduct and the Act will constitute a breach of your Contract and possible sanctions against you .
\t"You will be responsible for and indemnify J Rothschild Assurance against all loss, damages, costs, expenses or liabilities incurred by it directly or indirectly in consequence of any breach of your obligations expressed or implied under this Contract .
This provision shall survive termination of this Contract and remain in force in respect of all liabilities incurred both before and after such termination .
\t"Due to your responsibilities outlined above, it is important that you maintain your Professional Indemnity Insurance to afford you as much protection as possible. .
It is therefore possible that JRA will seek to recover from their appointed representatives under such contracts indemnities for the cost of providing redress for their investors .
Questions might arise under the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 .
The appointed representatives on the other hand may be joined as plaintiffs in these proceedings .
In such circumstances claims against the underwriters may arise in which the excess limits applicable to individual appointed representatives become relevant .
For the moment, however, I do not see how they can be .
The review was designed to operate on the basis that firms would provide the compensation, and that is what has happened.\r\n   \tI do not seek to anticipate what may happen in different circumstances .
Nor am I called upon to say anything about the aggregation clause found in Definition 4, nor about unpleaded matters that may subsequently become relevant, such as estoppel by convention or special trade meanings and so on.\r\n   \tSample 2 is perhaps worth mentioning separately in this context .
As I understand the matter the claim in respect of sample 2 is made by JRA, but JRA are not responsible for it, and have not offered redress to Mrs Harwood in respect of it .
That has been done by Mr Cameron, to whom JRA are merely minded to lend the money to enable compensation to be made .
If Mr Cameron were a plaintiff in this action, then the claim would be his, and plainly his excess and not JRA\'s would be relevant.\r\n   \tIn these circumstances I am not prepared to make the declaration under issue 5 which has been sought by JRA .
However, I do not treat this as a final determination of the question raised by that declaration, for I think it would be more satisfactory if all questions raised in connection with the subject-matter of excesses were visited as a whole.\r\n    .
b'The Hon .
Mr. Justice Moore-Bick: This matter comes before the court by way of an arbitration application under which the applicants seek a declaration that arbitration was commenced prior to the expiry of the one year time limit contained in Article III, r.6 of the Hague Rules and in the alternative an order extending time for the commencement of arbitration .
The dispute between the parties arises out of the carriage of a cargo of fruit in the vessel  Baltic Universal  from Seattle and Port Canaveral to Rotterdam between December 1995 and January 1996 .
It is alleged that on arrival at Rotterdam the fruit was found to have suffered damage in the form of crushing caused by excessive movement during the course of the voyage .
That in turn is said to have been the result of poor stowage .
The first applicants are the insurers of the cargo, the second applicants are said to be the holders of the bills of lading and the third applicants forwarding agents instructed to handle the cargo at Rotterdam .
There may be some question whether the second or third applicants are properly to be regarded as holders of the bills of lading, but I am not concerned with that for present purposes .
The cargo was carried under three bills of lading in similar, but not identical, form .
The two bills of lading issued at Seattle were on the Congenbill form, 1978 edition .
Each of them bore the typed notation       "\tAll terms and conditions of the charterparty dated December 6, 1995 including the arbitration clause are fully incorporated into this bill of lading.  .
The Conditions of Carriage printed on the reverse included the following:      "\t\t8 .
Arbitration All disputes arising out of this Bill of Lading shall be arbitrated at London and, unless the parties agree forthwith on a single Arbitrator, be referred to the final arbitrament of two Arbitrators carrying on business in London  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
one to be appointed by each of the parties  .
 .
 .
 .
.  .
The bill of lading issued at Port Canaveral, also on the Congenbill form, 1978 edition, contained on its face the same typed clause incorporating the terms of the charter of 6th December 1995 .
The Conditions of Carriage printed on the reverse did not, however, include any kind of arbitration clause .
Each of the bills of lading contained a General Paramount Clause incorporating the Hague or Hague-Visby Rules as appropriate .
It was common ground, therefore, that any claim for damage to cargo was subject to the twelve month time bar contained in Article III, r.6 of both the Hague and Hague-Visby Rules .
The vessel completed discharging in Rotterdam on 10th January 1996 .
A survey of the cargo was carried out but no steps were taken to pursue a claim by way of arbitration until January 1997 .
On 9th January 1997 the applicants\' Dutch lawyers contacted solicitors in London, Waltons & Morse, asking them to take urgent steps to commence proceedings in view of the imminent expiry of the time bar .
Accordingly, later the same day Waltons sent the following letter by fax to the vessel\'s P & I Club:       "\tDear Sirs, m.v .
"BALTIC UNIVERSAL" - Bill of Lading ROT-6 16.12.95 at Seattle Bill of Lading ROT-7 16.12.95 at Seattle Bill of Lading PC-01 30.12.95 at Port Canaveral We are instructed on behalf of the subrogated underwriters (Allianz in Hamburg) of two consignments of pears and a consignment of grapefruit carried from Everett and Port Canaveral to Rotterdam on board the m.v .
"BALTIC UNIVERSAL", arriving in Rotterdam on 10th January 1996 .
On arrival, it was discovered that all consignments had been subjected to considerable physical damage and that a consignment of pears had been contaminated by hydraulic oil .
Our clients have suffered losses in the sum of Dfl588,131.86 .
We understand that the vessel is owned by Fortuna Co. Inc, and is managed by London Ship Managers Ltd. We further understand that the vessel is entered with the UK P&I Club .
You have, of course, already been in correspondence with our clients\' Dutch attorneys, Messrs Dolk Verburg Diamand .
We hereby notify you that in view of the expiration of the statutory time bar, we have appointed Mr. Michael Baskerville  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
as arbitrator on behalf of our clients, Allianz, SFI Rotterdam B.V. and Overseas FSC B.V. in connection with all disputes arising under the three bills of lading referred to above .
We look forward to receiving your acknowledgment of safe receipt of this facsimile as soon as possible .
We shall also be grateful to receive your confirmation that security will be provided in relation to these claims without further delay, failing which, we shall have no alternative than to seek to consider the arrest of one of the vessels in your Member\'s ownership.  .
Also on 9th January Waltons wrote to Mr. Baskerville appointing him as arbitrator on behalf of the applicants .
On 10th January the UK P&I Club acknowledged receipt of Waltons\' fax .
They said that they were discussing the matter with their member and would respond in the near future .
On 15th January the Club sent a proposed letter of undertaking for the applicants\' consideration .
There followed some telephone conversations concerning parallel proceedings which had been commenced in the Netherlands which led Waltons to write to the Club again on 20th January in the following terms:       "\tFurther to our recent telephone conversations we have received confirmation from Dr. Dolk that the proceedings commenced in the Netherlands were issued purely to protect time .
We shall therefore continue the Arbitration proceedings and would call upon you to agree to the appointment of Mr. Baskerville as sole arbitrator.  .
On 24th January the Club notified Waltons of the appointment of Mr. O\'Donovan as the respondents\' arbitrator and a few days later it provided a letter of undertaking by way of security for the claim in terms which were acceptable to Waltons as the applicants\' solicitors .
Thereafter the arbitration proceeded at a leisurely pace for several months .
There were negotiations between the parties and while they were going on neither side was particularly anxious to pursue the proceedings .
On 18th September points of claim were served and the respondents indicated their intention to serve points of defence within 28 days .
However, on 14th November, without any apparent warning, the respondents\' solicitors, Jackson Parton, wrote to Waltons to say that in the light of the decision in  Vosnoc Ltd v Transglobal Projects Ltd  [1998] 1 W.L.R .
101 they considered that the letter of 9th January 1997 was ineffective to commence arbitration proceedings with the result that the claim had become time barred on 10th January .
That led in due course to the present application .
It was common ground that Article III, r.6 applies as a matter of contract to the claims under all three bills of lading and if the applicants fail to obtain a declaration that they commenced arbitration before the time limit expired they seek an extension of time under the appropriate statutory provisions .
The respondents have given notice that under those circumstances they will wish to contend that the time bar has statutory, rather than merely contractual, force so that the court is unable to extend time to preserve the applicants\' claims .
Prior to the hearing of this application the parties had provisionally agreed that that question should be decided by the arbitrators and that I should be invited to deal with the application for an extension of time on the assumption that the time bar was purely contractual .
However, the existence of a statutory time bar is of such significance when the exercise of the court\'s discretion is in issue that I did not think it satisfactory to entertain the application for an extension of time on that basis .
Accordingly, I have at this stage only heard argument on the first part of the application (and argument on one issue relating to the application for an extension of time which is closely related to it) and have adjourned the remainder of the application .
The issue which arises for decision at this hearing is whether Waltons\' letter of 9th January was sufficient to commence arbitration against the respondents so as to satisfy the requirements of Article III, r.6 .
The rule itself refers to the bringing of suit, but it is well established that it covers the commencement of arbitration where the parties have chosen that method of resolving their disputes .
One might have thought that the manner in which arbitration is to be commenced was primarily a matter for agreement between the parties, and indeed that is now recognised to be so by section 14 of the Arbitration Act 1996 in relation to those arbitrations to which it applies .
The 1996 Act also makes provision for those cases in which the parties have not agreed a method of commencing proceedings, but it did not come into effect until 31st January 1997 and the present case therefore falls to be decided by reference to the law in force before that date .
In  Nea Agrex S.A. v Baltic Shipping Co. Ltd  [1976] 1 Q.B .
933 this very question came before the Court of Appeal .
The  Aghios Lazaros  was employed to carry a cargo of oranges from Greece to Rotterdam and/or Hamburg under a charter which contained a clause paramount and an arbitration clause in these terms:       "\tIf any dispute arises during the performance of this charterparty and cannot be solved amicably, [the same] shall be referred to arbitration in London " .
The oranges were found to be damaged on arrival and as a result a dispute arose between the parties .
The charterers through their agents wrote to the shipowners calling on them to take steps to resolve the dispute .
They said       "\tPlease advise your proposals in order to settle this matter, or name your arbitrators.  .
One question which the court had to decide was whether by writing in those terms the charterers had done enough to commence arbitration so as to prevent the claim from becoming time-barred under Article III, r.6 .
In the absence of authority as to when arbitration is commenced the court adopted the suggestion of the parties in that case that the provisions of the Limitation Act should be applied by analogy .
Section 27(3) of the Limitation Act 1939 then in force provided as follows:       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
an arbitration shall be deemed to be commenced when one party to the arbitration serves on the other party or parties a notice requiring him or them to appoint an arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
.  .
These provisions were re-enacted with minor amendments as section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 and are reproduced in substantially the same terms as part of the more extensive code to be found in section 14 of the Arbitration Act 1996 .
By virtue of section 6 of the Arbitration Act 1950 the arbitration agreement in the  Nea Agrex  case was to be construed as providing for a reference to a single arbitrator .
Accordingly, the correct method of constituting the tribunal was for the parties to agree on the identity of an arbitrator or, if they could not do so, apply to the court under section 10 of the Act .
It follows that it was a case in which the charterers ought to have sent a notice to the shipowners requiring them to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator, either nominating the person they wished to see appointed or putting forward a list of names for consideration .
However, the charterers appear to have been under the impression that the arbitration agreement provided for a three man tribunal, each party initially appointing the arbitrator of his choice, and so they called upon the shipowners to "name your arbitrators", i.e .
nominate their member of the tribunal .
(The suggestion that the letter should be read as meaning "provide us with your list of names for consideration" was rejected. .
The letter did not, therefore, on any view comply with the strict requirements of section 27(3) of the Limitation Act .
The question which the court had to consider was whether strict compliance was necessary or whether something less would do .
All the members of the court held that the charterers\' letter was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of section 27(3), but they gave rather different reasons for their conclusions .
Although Lord Denning M.R .
accepted the need for a notice in writing, he considered it sufficient if the notice  by implication  required the other party to take the necessary step, whether to appoint his own arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of a sole arbitrator .
He put the matter in this way at page 944G-945C:       "\t\tIn order to commence the arbitration, there must, I think, be a notice in writing served by one party on the other party .
This notice must contain a requirement .
It must require the other party to do one or other of two things: either (1) "to appoint an arbitrator" or (2) "to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
The first alternative (1) is appropriate in a case where the reference is to two arbitrators, one to be appointed by each party .
In such a case the arbitrations deemed to commence when the one party, expressly or by implication, requires the other party to appoint his arbitrator .
If he simply says: "I require the difference to be submitted to arbitration in accordance with our agreement" that is sufficient to commence the arbitration: because it is by implication a request to the other to appoint his arbitrator .
The second alternative (2) is appropriate when the reference is to a single arbitrator .
In such a case the arbitration is deemed to commence when the one party, expressly or by implication, says: "The time has come when we must submit the difference to arbitration in accordance with our agreement .
I must ask you to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
Now he cannot compel the other party to agree, or even to reply to the requirement .
It seems to me that a notice which says: "I require the difference between us to be submitted to arbitration" is sufficient to commence the arbitration: because it is by implication a request to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator .
So in any case a simple notice in writing requiring the difference to be submitted to arbitration is deemed to be a commencement of the arbitration.  .
It is clear from that passage that in Lord Denning\'s view no particular form of words is necessary provided that relevant communication contains a sufficiently clear notice to the other party that he is required to take the necessary step to submit the dispute to arbitration .
Goff L.J .
dealt with the matter in a rather different way .
He said at pages 949H-950D:       "\tThis being so we have next to decide the question which did not arise before the judge, whether the charterers did, or failed to, commence arbitration within the year .
For this purpose in my judgment one must apply the Limitation Act 1939, section 27(3) by analogy .
That section poses some problems and there appears to be no authority as to its construction .
It is, as the charterers submit, a "deeming section", but the question is whether, as they say, the methods prescribed are deemed to be sufficient without prejudice to any other way in which arbitration may in fact be commenced, or whether the statutory methods are the only ones for the purposes of limitation .
In my view, the latter is correct, because the steps envisaged by the section are such as by their very nature would commence an arbitration and do not require to be deemed such, although I agree with Lord Denning M.R .
that the necessary request may be implies .
However, it is not necessary to reach a final decision on that point .
The section  I think clearly envisages that a party who wishes to commence arbitration will, when there are to be arbitrators on both sides, call upon his opponent "to appoint an arbitrator", and when the reference is to a single arbitrator will call upon him "to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
However, if he adopts the wrong course, that would not in my judgment make his requisition a nullity, or prevent arbitration commencing .
It would be no more than an irregularity capable of being remedied .
In the case of a single arbitrator the sensible course would be either to submit a name or names for approval, or to ask the other side to do so, but I am inclined to think that a formal notice, merely calling upon him to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator, would suffice to commence the arbitration, and so save the claim from becoming time barred, but this again we need not I think decide.  .
It appears that Goff L.J .
considered that the notice in that case was sufficient because it did expressly require the shipowners to take a step towards constituting the tribunal, albeit the wrong one, and so could be treated as irregular, but effective, rather than a nullity, but it also appears that he would, if necessary, have been prepared to approach the question on the broader basis which commended itself to Lord Denning M.R .
I say that because as I read the passage in his judgment at page 950A-B, Goff L.J .
agreed with Lord Denning that the necessary request could be implied .
The point on which he considered it unnecessary to reach a decision was the effect of section 27(3) .
Shaw L.J .
adopted a very similar approach to that of Lord Denning M.R .
He said at pages 954E-955A:       "\t\tIt is to be observed that this [sc .
section 27(3)] is a deeming provision designed to ascertain for the purposes of the Limitation Act 1939 the point of time at which an arbitration is to be regarded as having commenced .
It does not exclude other direct means of establishing the commencement of an arbitration .
If a general principle is to extracted from section 27(3) it seems to me that where a dispute arises which is within the scope of a pre-existing agreement to submit disputes to arbitration,then an arbitration is commenced when one party gives notice to the other party intimating that he proposes to invoke the arbitration agreement and requiring that other party to take some step towards setting an arbitration in train .
By analogy with the procedure prescribed in section 27(4) of the Act of 1939, such a notice must be in writing and served in accordance with the rules there set out .
The commencement of the arbitration would coincide with the service of the notice on the other party .
The giving of such notice is a matter inter partes and is a procedural and not a decisive step .
Accordingly, its form and terms do not call for an excessively strict scrutiny .
If, in substance, a party communicates (i) an intention to resort to arbitration and (ii) a requirement that the other party should do something on his part in that regard, this will in general suffice to define the commencement of arbitration or, for the purpose of article III, rule 6, of the Hague Rules, the date when "suit is brought. .
Applying these principles to the present case, I would hold that the letter of May 31, 1972, addressed to the shipowners was sufficient to mark the commencement of the arbitration.  .
Although by referring to the "substance" of the communication rather than to an "implied request" Shaw L.J .
expressed himself in slightly different terms from Lord Denning M.R., his approach to the question seems to me to be fundamentally the same .
There has been some debate about how far it is permissible to stretch this approach, and in particular whether a simple notice of the kind envisaged by Lord Denning M.R .
would suffice (see the comments of Kerr J. in  Surrendra Overseas Ltd v Government of Sri Lanka  [1977] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep. 653, 657-658 and  Mustill & Boyd, Commercial Arbitration , 2nd ed .
at page 199, note 4) .
However, the broad approach of the Court of Appeal in the  Nea Agrex  case, and in particular the judgment of Lord Denning\xc2\xa0M.R., has been applied in many subsequent cases, the most notable of which for present purposes is  Peter Cremer G.m.b.H .
& Co v Sugat Food Industries Ltd (The "Rimon")  [1981] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep. 640 in which two telex messages containing the phrases       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
settling of claims of both sides will be done by arbitrators according to gafta rules.  .
and       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
the point of who is to be blamed  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
shall be decided by arbitrators.  .
were held to be sufficient to commence arbitration for the purposes of the statutory instrument bringing the Arbitration Act 1979 into effect .
It has therefore been widely accepted that a notice which communicates in substance, whatever words are used, that which is required by the relevant Limitation Act will be sufficient to stop time running .
Accordingly, attention has been directed to the real meaning of the communication on which the claimant relies having due regard to the context in which it was sent .
However, apart from making a passing appearance in  Surrendra Overseas Ltd v Government of Sri Lanka  which was decided on a different point, the question of principle does not appear to have been considered again until it arose in  Vosnoc Ltd v Transglobal Projects Ltd  [1998] 1 W.L.R .
101 .
That case concerned a contract of affreightment for the carriage of pipes from Port Kembla in New South Wales to Kuantan in Malaysia .
The contract contained an arbitration agreement which provided for disputes to be referred to a tribunal of three arbitrators in London, one to be appointed by each party and the third by the two so chosen .
The Hague Rules were incorporated into the contract and thus the one year time limit in Article III, r.6 applied .
After a dispute had arisen the claimants sent a letter to the respondents in which they said that the cargo carried on the vessel had been seriously damaged in the course of carriage and concluded in these terms:       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
By this letter the dispute between our respective companies is referred to the arbitration of three arbitrators in London pursuant to the provisions of clause 17.8 [the arbitration clause] of the contract of affreightment  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
.  .
Apart from that, however, no steps were taken to commence arbitration before the expiry of the time bar .
The claimants\' letter seeking to refer the dispute to arbitration was couched in terms similar to those which Lord Denning\xc2\xa0M.R .
in the  Nea Agrex  case had suggested would contain an implied requirement to appoint an arbitrator sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the Limitation Act .
However, having considered the judgments in the  Nea Agrex  case in some detail, His Honour Judge Raymond Jack\xc2\xa0Q.C .
concluded that it did not have that effect .
Judge Jack Q.C .
identified the question he had to decide as being whether a notice requiring differences to be submitted to arbitration satisfies section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 because it carries with it by implication a request that the recipient appoint his arbitrator, and thus whether the judgment of Lord Denning M.R .
should be followed on that point .
He concluded that an implied request would not suffice .
Mr. Parsons for the applicants in this case submitted that Judge Jack\'s decision on this point was wrong and should not be followed .
He submitted that whatever might be said about the particular form of the letter which the court had to consider in that case, it was part of the ratio of the  Nea Agrex  case that precise compliance with the terms of the Act by means of an express request is not required and that an implied request is sufficient .
Mr. Picken, on the other hand adopted the reasoning of Judge Jack Q.C .
He pointed out that only Lord Denning M.R .
had suggested that an implied request would be sufficient and that in any event his views were obiter inasmuch as the charterers\' letter in that case did specifically call on the shipowners to take steps by naming their arbitrator .
Judge Jack Q.C .
approached the case before him on the basis that it was an open question whether, in order to stop time running under Article III, r.6, it is necessary to give notice in terms which expressly require the other party to take the steps referred to in the Limitation Act, or whether a notice which does so by implication will suffice .
(That is not the same, of course, as the question whether a notice in the particular form suggested by Lord Denning M.R .
would carry the necessary implication. .
It is necessary, therefore, to see what the Court of Appeal did decide in the  Nea Agrex  case .
It clearly did decide that strict compliance with the Limitation Act was not necessary, otherwise the charterers must have failed on that ground, but because of the different ways in which the members of the court expressed themselves it is a little more difficult to identify a common principle .
Like Judge Jack Q.C .
I think it is clear that Lord Denning M.R.\'s judgment rests squarely on his acceptance of the proposition that the request to appoint an arbitrator may be implied, and I think it is equally clear that the judgment of Shaw L.J .
rests on his conclusion that is sufficient for the requirement to communicated in substance .
In my judgment this comes to much the same thing and there is, therefore, clearly a majority in support of the principle that it is necessary to look at the real meaning of the notice rather than merely the form of words used .
The principle must go beyond a mere question of construction, as the facts of the case demonstrate, since the charterers\' letter in that case could not easily be construed as requiring the shipowners to agree to the appointment of a sole arbitrator .
For the charterers to succeed it was necessary for the court to accept that a notice requiring them to take steps of some kind towards making an appointment, albeit the wrong ones, was sufficient .
Accordingly, I think that the  Nea Agrex  case is binding authority for the proposition that a notice in writing which, read in its context, makes it clear by whatever language that the sender is invoking the arbitration agreement and is requiring the recipient take steps in response to enable the tribunal to be constituted is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 and of Article\xc2\xa0III, r.6 .
It follows that I am unable to agree with Judge Jack Q.C .
that in a case such as the present the claimant must expressly call upon the respondent to appoint his arbitrator in order to commence arbitration .
In my view the decision in the  Nea Agrex  case is authority to the contrary, and even if it were not binding it would be of the highest persuasive authority .
Although notices of arbitration are often given by legal advisors, as happened in the present case, they are more often given by the parties themselves whose first language may often not be English and who may have little understanding of the technicalities of English law .
What is important for them is not whether a notice contains a particular form of words but whether it makes it clear that the arbitration agreement is being invoked and that they are required to take steps accordingly .
Provided that is done both the policy of the Act and the requirements of commercial life are satisfied .
In my view, if the question did remain open, these considerations would point strongly in favour of adopting the approach of Lord Denning M.R .
and Shaw L.J .
which does not seem to me to run counter to the policy of the statutory provisions .
I would respectfully suggest that it is wrong to say that English law has taken a policy decision, contrary to that reflected in Article 21 of the UNCITRAL Model Law, that in order to commence arbitration it is necessary to take a step towards constituting the tribunal, if by that is meant anything beyond invoking the arbitration agreement .
Where the agreement provides for each party to appoint an arbitrator the first and most obvious step towards constituting the tribunal is for the claimant to appoint his own arbitrator, but that is not one of the requirements of section 34(3) .
Similarly, in the case where the parties have agreed to refer disputes to a named arbitrator the section does not require the claimant to notify the arbitrator that a dispute has arisen; it merely requires him to serve a notice on the respondent requiring him to submit the dispute to that person .
Where the arbitration agreement provides for a sole arbitrator the notice must require the recipient to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator (though there is no requirement on the claimant to propose any names for the respondent\'s consideration), but although in this last case it can be said that a notice to agree is the first step towards constituting the tribunal, I think that all these cases are better viewed as different ways of invoking the arbitration agreement, in other words, of saying to the respondent, `I demand the right to have this dispute decided by arbitration as we agreed and require your co-operation in bringing that about\' .
I approach the present application, therefore, on the basis of the principles which in my judgment are to be derived from the  Nea Agrex  case .
However, before turning to the terms of the letter itself it is necessary to say something about the arbitration agreements .
Each of the bills of lading incorporated the arbitration clause of a charterparty dated 6th December 1995, but apart from that the charter was not identified .
The application was argued before me on the basis that this referred to a charterparty of that date on the Gencon form between Universal Reefers Ltd as owners and Scivik Shipping G.m.b.H .
as charterers .
At the last minute Mr. Picken suggested that there might be some other charter, also dated 6th December 1995, to which the reference might have been intended to apply and which might contain an arbitration clause in different terms .
However, I have seen nothing to support that suggestion, and to be fair it was not seriously pursued .
The material part of the charterparty arbitration clause reads as follows:       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
Unless the parties agree upon a sole arbitrator, one arbitrator shall be appointed by each party and the arbitrators so appointed shall appoint a third arbitrator, the decision of the three-man tribunal thus constituted or any two of them shall be final .
On receipt by one party of the nomination in writing of the other party\'s arbitrator, that party shall appoint their arbitrator within fourteen days, failing which the decision of the single arbitrator appointed shall be final.  .
Apart from the final sentence, therefore, this clause, although differently worded, provided for arbitration in the same manner as the arbitration clauses in the bills of lading .
In each case the parties contemplated that there should be a sole arbitrator if they could agree on a suitable person, and if not, that there should be a three-man tribunal appointed in the usual way .
There was some argument between the parties over the effect of the purported incorporation of the charterparty arbitration clause into the two bills of lading also which contained their own arbitration clauses, but that is not a question which I think it necessary to resolve for the purposes of this application .
One way or another each of the bills of lading incorporated an agreement to arbitrate which provided for a sole arbitrator or, in default, for a three-man tribunal .
Strictly speaking, therefore, I think that the applicants ought to have begun by giving the kind of notice which would be appropriate in the case of an agreement to refer disputes to a sole arbitrator .
Only if the parties were unable to agree would the agreement for a three-man tribunal come into play .
It is for this reason that I cannot accept Mr. Parsons\' submission that the charterparty arbitration clause contemplated as the primary method of commencing arbitration the nomination by one party of his own arbitrator .
Mr. Picken drew my attention to a passage at page 199 of  Mustill & Boyd  where the learned editors say that a notice by the claimant that he himself has appointed an arbitrator is not a sufficient compliance with the statute .
However, for my own part I doubt whether the position can be stated quite as simply as that in the light of the court\'s approach in the  Nea Agrex  case .
Of course, in one sense it is necessary for the claimants to go further and require the respondents to appoint their arbitrator, but whether they have in fact made it clear that they are requiring the respondents to take some step themselves depends on what one can properly read into the message having regard to its terms and the context in which it was sent .
Waltons\' letter of 9th January 1997 was sent on the day before the one year time limit for commencing proceedings expired, and indeed it expressly referred to the expiry of time .
The letter does not, of course, contain an express notice to the respondents requiring them to agree upon the appointment of a sole arbitrator or even to appoint their own arbitrator; insofar as it expressly required the respondents to do anything it was to acknowledge receipt and confirm that security would be provided .
However, given its terms and the context in which it was sent I find it difficult to believe that the Club did not understand perfectly well what it was intended to convey .
Indeed, when I asked Mr. Picken whether it could possibly be read otherwise than as a notice that the applicants were referring the dispute to arbitration and required the respondents to take appropriate action he was at something of a loss .
In my view the letter gave clear notice to the Club on behalf of the respondents that the applicants were invoking the arbitration agreements in the bills of lading, that they had appointed their own arbitrator, and that they required the respondents to appoint their arbitrator so that the tribunal could be fully constituted and the proceedings got properly under way .
If the arbitration agreement had provided simply for a three-man tribunal, therefore, I should have had little difficulty in holding that the notice, though undoubtedly poorly drafted, was adequate to satisfy the requirements of section 34(3) of the Limitation Act and thus sufficient to commence arbitration for the purposes of Article III, r.6 .
Does it make any difference that Waltons in fact gave the wrong sort of notice .
I do not think it does .
It can be argued that the letter of 9th January does not on any view require the respondents to agree upon a sole arbitrator and that therefore one cannot find within it a notice of the kind required, but if I am right in the view I have taken of the letter, namely that it does by implication require the respondents to appoint their arbitrator, this case is for all practical purposes the same as  Nea Agrex  .
The applicants did make it clear that they were invoking the arbitration agreements and did by implication call on the respondents to take steps in response in order to constitute the tribunal .
In my judgment that was sufficient .
For these reasons I have reached the conclusion that the applicants\' letter to the Club of 9th January 1997 was sufficient to commence arbitration and that consequently their claim is not time-barred .
That makes it unnecessary for me to consider the effect of the letter of 20th January, but in view of the way in which the argument developed I propose to say a few words about it .
Mr. Parsons submitted that whatever may be said about the letter of 9th January, the letter of 20th January did expressly call upon the Club to agree to the appointment of Mr. Baskerville and therefore did on any view expressly comply with the requirements of the Limitation Act .
I think he is right about that .
Mr. Picken sought to persuade me that the letter was wholly ineffective because it really fell between two stools: it could not be read as intending to  commence  arbitration because it refers to  continuing  the proceedings; but neither could it be read as seeking a response to the letter of 9th January because this time Mr. Baskerville was being put forward for the first time as sole arbitrator .
I have to say that I should be very unwilling to take such a technical approach to a letter of this kind, the thrust of which is in my view quite clear .
The applicants are saying that they intend to pursue their claim by way of proceedings and invite the respondents to agree to Mr. Baskerville\'s acting as sole arbitrator .
Not to accept that letter as complying with the statutory requirements would be to take an unduly technical approach to the parties\' communications .
It follows that in my judgment the applicants commenced arbitration on 20th January at the latest and accordingly that if it were necessary for them to make an application for an extension of time that application would fall to be made under section 27 of the Arbitration Act 1950 rather than section 12 of the Arbitration Act 1996 .
\tThis matter comes before the court by way of an arbitration application under which the applicants seek a declaration that arbitration was commenced prior to the expiry of the one year time limit contained in Article III, r.6 of the Hague Rules and in the alternative an order extending time for the commencement of arbitration .
The dispute between the parties arises out of the carriage of a cargo of fruit in the vessel  Baltic Universal  from Seattle and Port Canaveral to Rotterdam between December 1995 and January 1996 .
It is alleged that on arrival at Rotterdam the fruit was found to have suffered damage in the form of crushing caused by excessive movement during the course of the voyage .
That in turn is said to have been the result of poor stowage .
The first applicants are the insurers of the cargo, the second applicants are said to be the holders of the bills of lading and the third applicants forwarding agents instructed to handle the cargo at Rotterdam .
There may be some question whether the second or third applicants are properly to be regarded as holders of the bills of lading, but I am not concerned with that for present purposes .
The cargo was carried under three bills of lading in similar, but not identical, form .
The two bills of lading issued at Seattle were on the Congenbill form, 1978 edition .
Each of them bore the typed notation       "\tAll terms and conditions of the charterparty dated December 6, 1995 including the arbitration clause are fully incorporated into this bill of lading.  .
The Conditions of Carriage printed on the reverse included the following:      "\t\t8 .
Arbitration All disputes arising out of this Bill of Lading shall be arbitrated at London and, unless the parties agree forthwith on a single Arbitrator, be referred to the final arbitrament of two Arbitrators carrying on business in London  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
one to be appointed by each of the parties  .
 .
 .
 .
.  .
The bill of lading issued at Port Canaveral, also on the Congenbill form, 1978 edition, contained on its face the same typed clause incorporating the terms of the charter of 6th December 1995 .
The Conditions of Carriage printed on the reverse did not, however, include any kind of arbitration clause .
Each of the bills of lading contained a General Paramount Clause incorporating the Hague or Hague-Visby Rules as appropriate .
It was common ground, therefore, that any claim for damage to cargo was subject to the twelve month time bar contained in Article III, r.6 of both the Hague and Hague-Visby Rules .
The vessel completed discharging in Rotterdam on 10th January 1996 .
A survey of the cargo was carried out but no steps were taken to pursue a claim by way of arbitration until January 1997 .
On 9th January 1997 the applicants\' Dutch lawyers contacted solicitors in London, Waltons & Morse, asking them to take urgent steps to commence proceedings in view of the imminent expiry of the time bar .
Accordingly, later the same day Waltons sent the following letter by fax to the vessel\'s P & I Club:       "\tDear Sirs, m.v .
"BALTIC UNIVERSAL" - Bill of Lading ROT-6 16.12.95 at Seattle Bill of Lading ROT-7 16.12.95 at Seattle Bill of Lading PC-01 30.12.95 at Port Canaveral We are instructed on behalf of the subrogated underwriters (Allianz in Hamburg) of two consignments of pears and a consignment of grapefruit carried from Everett and Port Canaveral to Rotterdam on board the m.v .
"BALTIC UNIVERSAL", arriving in Rotterdam on 10th January 1996 .
On arrival, it was discovered that all consignments had been subjected to considerable physical damage and that a consignment of pears had been contaminated by hydraulic oil .
Our clients have suffered losses in the sum of Dfl588,131.86 .
We understand that the vessel is owned by Fortuna Co. Inc, and is managed by London Ship Managers Ltd. We further understand that the vessel is entered with the UK P&I Club .
You have, of course, already been in correspondence with our clients\' Dutch attorneys, Messrs Dolk Verburg Diamand .
We hereby notify you that in view of the expiration of the statutory time bar, we have appointed Mr. Michael Baskerville  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
as arbitrator on behalf of our clients, Allianz, SFI Rotterdam B.V. and Overseas FSC B.V. in connection with all disputes arising under the three bills of lading referred to above .
We look forward to receiving your acknowledgment of safe receipt of this facsimile as soon as possible .
We shall also be grateful to receive your confirmation that security will be provided in relation to these claims without further delay, failing which, we shall have no alternative than to seek to consider the arrest of one of the vessels in your Member\'s ownership.  .
Also on 9th January Waltons wrote to Mr. Baskerville appointing him as arbitrator on behalf of the applicants .
On 10th January the UK P&I Club acknowledged receipt of Waltons\' fax .
They said that they were discussing the matter with their member and would respond in the near future .
On 15th January the Club sent a proposed letter of undertaking for the applicants\' consideration .
There followed some telephone conversations concerning parallel proceedings which had been commenced in the Netherlands which led Waltons to write to the Club again on 20th January in the following terms:       "\tFurther to our recent telephone conversations we have received confirmation from Dr. Dolk that the proceedings commenced in the Netherlands were issued purely to protect time .
We shall therefore continue the Arbitration proceedings and would call upon you to agree to the appointment of Mr. Baskerville as sole arbitrator.  .
On 24th January the Club notified Waltons of the appointment of Mr. O\'Donovan as the respondents\' arbitrator and a few days later it provided a letter of undertaking by way of security for the claim in terms which were acceptable to Waltons as the applicants\' solicitors .
Thereafter the arbitration proceeded at a leisurely pace for several months .
There were negotiations between the parties and while they were going on neither side was particularly anxious to pursue the proceedings .
On 18th September points of claim were served and the respondents indicated their intention to serve points of defence within 28 days .
However, on 14th November, without any apparent warning, the respondents\' solicitors, Jackson Parton, wrote to Waltons to say that in the light of the decision in  Vosnoc Ltd v Transglobal Projects Ltd  [1998] 1 W.L.R .
101 they considered that the letter of 9th January 1997 was ineffective to commence arbitration proceedings with the result that the claim had become time barred on 10th January .
That led in due course to the present application .
It was common ground that Article III, r.6 applies as a matter of contract to the claims under all three bills of lading and if the applicants fail to obtain a declaration that they commenced arbitration before the time limit expired they seek an extension of time under the appropriate statutory provisions .
The respondents have given notice that under those circumstances they will wish to contend that the time bar has statutory, rather than merely contractual, force so that the court is unable to extend time to preserve the applicants\' claims .
Prior to the hearing of this application the parties had provisionally agreed that that question should be decided by the arbitrators and that I should be invited to deal with the application for an extension of time on the assumption that the time bar was purely contractual .
However, the existence of a statutory time bar is of such significance when the exercise of the court\'s discretion is in issue that I did not think it satisfactory to entertain the application for an extension of time on that basis .
Accordingly, I have at this stage only heard argument on the first part of the application (and argument on one issue relating to the application for an extension of time which is closely related to it) and have adjourned the remainder of the application .
The issue which arises for decision at this hearing is whether Waltons\' letter of 9th January was sufficient to commence arbitration against the respondents so as to satisfy the requirements of Article III, r.6 .
The rule itself refers to the bringing of suit, but it is well established that it covers the commencement of arbitration where the parties have chosen that method of resolving their disputes .
One might have thought that the manner in which arbitration is to be commenced was primarily a matter for agreement between the parties, and indeed that is now recognised to be so by section 14 of the Arbitration Act 1996 in relation to those arbitrations to which it applies .
The 1996 Act also makes provision for those cases in which the parties have not agreed a method of commencing proceedings, but it did not come into effect until 31st January 1997 and the present case therefore falls to be decided by reference to the law in force before that date .
In  Nea Agrex S.A. v Baltic Shipping Co. Ltd  [1976] 1 Q.B .
933 this very question came before the Court of Appeal .
The  Aghios Lazaros  was employed to carry a cargo of oranges from Greece to Rotterdam and/or Hamburg under a charter which contained a clause paramount and an arbitration clause in these terms:       "\tIf any dispute arises during the performance of this charterparty and cannot be solved amicably, [the same] shall be referred to arbitration in London " .
The oranges were found to be damaged on arrival and as a result a dispute arose between the parties .
The charterers through their agents wrote to the shipowners calling on them to take steps to resolve the dispute .
They said       "\tPlease advise your proposals in order to settle this matter, or name your arbitrators.  .
One question which the court had to decide was whether by writing in those terms the charterers had done enough to commence arbitration so as to prevent the claim from becoming time-barred under Article III, r.6 .
In the absence of authority as to when arbitration is commenced the court adopted the suggestion of the parties in that case that the provisions of the Limitation Act should be applied by analogy .
Section 27(3) of the Limitation Act 1939 then in force provided as follows:       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
an arbitration shall be deemed to be commenced when one party to the arbitration serves on the other party or parties a notice requiring him or them to appoint an arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
.  .
These provisions were re-enacted with minor amendments as section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 and are reproduced in substantially the same terms as part of the more extensive code to be found in section 14 of the Arbitration Act 1996 .
By virtue of section 6 of the Arbitration Act 1950 the arbitration agreement in the  Nea Agrex  case was to be construed as providing for a reference to a single arbitrator .
Accordingly, the correct method of constituting the tribunal was for the parties to agree on the identity of an arbitrator or, if they could not do so, apply to the court under section 10 of the Act .
It follows that it was a case in which the charterers ought to have sent a notice to the shipowners requiring them to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator, either nominating the person they wished to see appointed or putting forward a list of names for consideration .
However, the charterers appear to have been under the impression that the arbitration agreement provided for a three man tribunal, each party initially appointing the arbitrator of his choice, and so they called upon the shipowners to "name your arbitrators", i.e .
nominate their member of the tribunal .
(The suggestion that the letter should be read as meaning "provide us with your list of names for consideration" was rejected. .
The letter did not, therefore, on any view comply with the strict requirements of section 27(3) of the Limitation Act .
The question which the court had to consider was whether strict compliance was necessary or whether something less would do .
All the members of the court held that the charterers\' letter was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of section 27(3), but they gave rather different reasons for their conclusions .
Although Lord Denning M.R .
accepted the need for a notice in writing, he considered it sufficient if the notice  by implication  required the other party to take the necessary step, whether to appoint his own arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of a sole arbitrator .
He put the matter in this way at page 944G-945C:       "\t\tIn order to commence the arbitration, there must, I think, be a notice in writing served by one party on the other party .
This notice must contain a requirement .
It must require the other party to do one or other of two things: either (1) "to appoint an arbitrator" or (2) "to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
The first alternative (1) is appropriate in a case where the reference is to two arbitrators, one to be appointed by each party .
In such a case the arbitrations deemed to commence when the one party, expressly or by implication, requires the other party to appoint his arbitrator .
If he simply says: "I require the difference to be submitted to arbitration in accordance with our agreement" that is sufficient to commence the arbitration: because it is by implication a request to the other to appoint his arbitrator .
The second alternative (2) is appropriate when the reference is to a single arbitrator .
In such a case the arbitration is deemed to commence when the one party, expressly or by implication, says: "The time has come when we must submit the difference to arbitration in accordance with our agreement .
I must ask you to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
Now he cannot compel the other party to agree, or even to reply to the requirement .
It seems to me that a notice which says: "I require the difference between us to be submitted to arbitration" is sufficient to commence the arbitration: because it is by implication a request to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator .
So in any case a simple notice in writing requiring the difference to be submitted to arbitration is deemed to be a commencement of the arbitration.  .
It is clear from that passage that in Lord Denning\'s view no particular form of words is necessary provided that relevant communication contains a sufficiently clear notice to the other party that he is required to take the necessary step to submit the dispute to arbitration .
Goff L.J .
dealt with the matter in a rather different way .
He said at pages 949H-950D:       "\tThis being so we have next to decide the question which did not arise before the judge, whether the charterers did, or failed to, commence arbitration within the year .
For this purpose in my judgment one must apply the Limitation Act 1939, section 27(3) by analogy .
That section poses some problems and there appears to be no authority as to its construction .
It is, as the charterers submit, a "deeming section", but the question is whether, as they say, the methods prescribed are deemed to be sufficient without prejudice to any other way in which arbitration may in fact be commenced, or whether the statutory methods are the only ones for the purposes of limitation .
In my view, the latter is correct, because the steps envisaged by the section are such as by their very nature would commence an arbitration and do not require to be deemed such, although I agree with Lord Denning M.R .
that the necessary request may be implies .
However, it is not necessary to reach a final decision on that point .
The section  I think clearly envisages that a party who wishes to commence arbitration will, when there are to be arbitrators on both sides, call upon his opponent "to appoint an arbitrator", and when the reference is to a single arbitrator will call upon him "to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
However, if he adopts the wrong course, that would not in my judgment make his requisition a nullity, or prevent arbitration commencing .
It would be no more than an irregularity capable of being remedied .
In the case of a single arbitrator the sensible course would be either to submit a name or names for approval, or to ask the other side to do so, but I am inclined to think that a formal notice, merely calling upon him to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator, would suffice to commence the arbitration, and so save the claim from becoming time barred, but this again we need not I think decide.  .
It appears that Goff L.J .
considered that the notice in that case was sufficient because it did expressly require the shipowners to take a step towards constituting the tribunal, albeit the wrong one, and so could be treated as irregular, but effective, rather than a nullity, but it also appears that he would, if necessary, have been prepared to approach the question on the broader basis which commended itself to Lord Denning M.R .
I say that because as I read the passage in his judgment at page 950A-B, Goff L.J .
agreed with Lord Denning that the necessary request could be implied .
The point on which he considered it unnecessary to reach a decision was the effect of section 27(3) .
Shaw L.J .
adopted a very similar approach to that of Lord Denning M.R .
He said at pages 954E-955A:       "\t\tIt is to be observed that this [sc .
section 27(3)] is a deeming provision designed to ascertain for the purposes of the Limitation Act 1939 the point of time at which an arbitration is to be regarded as having commenced .
It does not exclude other direct means of establishing the commencement of an arbitration .
If a general principle is to extracted from section 27(3) it seems to me that where a dispute arises which is within the scope of a pre-existing agreement to submit disputes to arbitration,then an arbitration is commenced when one party gives notice to the other party intimating that he proposes to invoke the arbitration agreement and requiring that other party to take some step towards setting an arbitration in train .
By analogy with the procedure prescribed in section 27(4) of the Act of 1939, such a notice must be in writing and served in accordance with the rules there set out .
The commencement of the arbitration would coincide with the service of the notice on the other party .
The giving of such notice is a matter inter partes and is a procedural and not a decisive step .
Accordingly, its form and terms do not call for an excessively strict scrutiny .
If, in substance, a party communicates (i) an intention to resort to arbitration and (ii) a requirement that the other party should do something on his part in that regard, this will in general suffice to define the commencement of arbitration or, for the purpose of article III, rule 6, of the Hague Rules, the date when "suit is brought. .
Applying these principles to the present case, I would hold that the letter of May 31, 1972, addressed to the shipowners was sufficient to mark the commencement of the arbitration.  .
Although by referring to the "substance" of the communication rather than to an "implied request" Shaw L.J .
expressed himself in slightly different terms from Lord Denning M.R., his approach to the question seems to me to be fundamentally the same .
There has been some debate about how far it is permissible to stretch this approach, and in particular whether a simple notice of the kind envisaged by Lord Denning M.R .
would suffice (see the comments of Kerr J. in  Surrendra Overseas Ltd v Government of Sri Lanka  [1977] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep. 653, 657-658 and  Mustill & Boyd, Commercial Arbitration , 2nd ed .
at page 199, note 4) .
However, the broad approach of the Court of Appeal in the  Nea Agrex  case, and in particular the judgment of Lord Denning\xc2\xa0M.R., has been applied in many subsequent cases, the most notable of which for present purposes is  Peter Cremer G.m.b.H .
& Co v Sugat Food Industries Ltd (The "Rimon")  [1981] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep. 640 in which two telex messages containing the phrases       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
settling of claims of both sides will be done by arbitrators according to gafta rules.  .
and       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
the point of who is to be blamed  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
shall be decided by arbitrators.  .
were held to be sufficient to commence arbitration for the purposes of the statutory instrument bringing the Arbitration Act 1979 into effect .
It has therefore been widely accepted that a notice which communicates in substance, whatever words are used, that which is required by the relevant Limitation Act will be sufficient to stop time running .
Accordingly, attention has been directed to the real meaning of the communication on which the claimant relies having due regard to the context in which it was sent .
However, apart from making a passing appearance in  Surrendra Overseas Ltd v Government of Sri Lanka  which was decided on a different point, the question of principle does not appear to have been considered again until it arose in  Vosnoc Ltd v Transglobal Projects Ltd  [1998] 1 W.L.R .
101 .
That case concerned a contract of affreightment for the carriage of pipes from Port Kembla in New South Wales to Kuantan in Malaysia .
The contract contained an arbitration agreement which provided for disputes to be referred to a tribunal of three arbitrators in London, one to be appointed by each party and the third by the two so chosen .
The Hague Rules were incorporated into the contract and thus the one year time limit in Article III, r.6 applied .
After a dispute had arisen the claimants sent a letter to the respondents in which they said that the cargo carried on the vessel had been seriously damaged in the course of carriage and concluded in these terms:       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
By this letter the dispute between our respective companies is referred to the arbitration of three arbitrators in London pursuant to the provisions of clause 17.8 [the arbitration clause] of the contract of affreightment  .
 .
 .
 .
 .
.  .
Apart from that, however, no steps were taken to commence arbitration before the expiry of the time bar .
The claimants\' letter seeking to refer the dispute to arbitration was couched in terms similar to those which Lord Denning\xc2\xa0M.R .
in the  Nea Agrex  case had suggested would contain an implied requirement to appoint an arbitrator sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the Limitation Act .
However, having considered the judgments in the  Nea Agrex  case in some detail, His Honour Judge Raymond Jack\xc2\xa0Q.C .
concluded that it did not have that effect .
Judge Jack Q.C .
identified the question he had to decide as being whether a notice requiring differences to be submitted to arbitration satisfies section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 because it carries with it by implication a request that the recipient appoint his arbitrator, and thus whether the judgment of Lord Denning M.R .
should be followed on that point .
He concluded that an implied request would not suffice .
Mr. Parsons for the applicants in this case submitted that Judge Jack\'s decision on this point was wrong and should not be followed .
He submitted that whatever might be said about the particular form of the letter which the court had to consider in that case, it was part of the ratio of the  Nea Agrex  case that precise compliance with the terms of the Act by means of an express request is not required and that an implied request is sufficient .
Mr. Picken, on the other hand adopted the reasoning of Judge Jack Q.C .
He pointed out that only Lord Denning M.R .
had suggested that an implied request would be sufficient and that in any event his views were obiter inasmuch as the charterers\' letter in that case did specifically call on the shipowners to take steps by naming their arbitrator .
Judge Jack Q.C .
approached the case before him on the basis that it was an open question whether, in order to stop time running under Article III, r.6, it is necessary to give notice in terms which expressly require the other party to take the steps referred to in the Limitation Act, or whether a notice which does so by implication will suffice .
(That is not the same, of course, as the question whether a notice in the particular form suggested by Lord Denning M.R .
would carry the necessary implication. .
It is necessary, therefore, to see what the Court of Appeal did decide in the  Nea Agrex  case .
It clearly did decide that strict compliance with the Limitation Act was not necessary, otherwise the charterers must have failed on that ground, but because of the different ways in which the members of the court expressed themselves it is a little more difficult to identify a common principle .
Like Judge Jack Q.C .
I think it is clear that Lord Denning M.R.\'s judgment rests squarely on his acceptance of the proposition that the request to appoint an arbitrator may be implied, and I think it is equally clear that the judgment of Shaw L.J .
rests on his conclusion that is sufficient for the requirement to communicated in substance .
In my judgment this comes to much the same thing and there is, therefore, clearly a majority in support of the principle that it is necessary to look at the real meaning of the notice rather than merely the form of words used .
The principle must go beyond a mere question of construction, as the facts of the case demonstrate, since the charterers\' letter in that case could not easily be construed as requiring the shipowners to agree to the appointment of a sole arbitrator .
For the charterers to succeed it was necessary for the court to accept that a notice requiring them to take steps of some kind towards making an appointment, albeit the wrong ones, was sufficient .
Accordingly, I think that the  Nea Agrex  case is binding authority for the proposition that a notice in writing which, read in its context, makes it clear by whatever language that the sender is invoking the arbitration agreement and is requiring the recipient take steps in response to enable the tribunal to be constituted is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 and of Article\xc2\xa0III, r.6 .
It follows that I am unable to agree with Judge Jack Q.C .
that in a case such as the present the claimant must expressly call upon the respondent to appoint his arbitrator in order to commence arbitration .
In my view the decision in the  Nea Agrex  case is authority to the contrary, and even if it were not binding it would be of the highest persuasive authority .
Although notices of arbitration are often given by legal advisors, as happened in the present case, they are more often given by the parties themselves whose first language may often not be English and who may have little understanding of the technicalities of English law .
What is important for them is not whether a notice contains a particular form of words but whether it makes it clear that the arbitration agreement is being invoked and that they are required to take steps accordingly .
Provided that is done both the policy of the Act and the requirements of commercial life are satisfied .
In my view, if the question did remain open, these considerations would point strongly in favour of adopting the approach of Lord Denning M.R .
and Shaw L.J .
which does not seem to me to run counter to the policy of the statutory provisions .
I would respectfully suggest that it is wrong to say that English law has taken a policy decision, contrary to that reflected in Article 21 of the UNCITRAL Model Law, that in order to commence arbitration it is necessary to take a step towards constituting the tribunal, if by that is meant anything beyond invoking the arbitration agreement .
Where the agreement provides for each party to appoint an arbitrator the first and most obvious step towards constituting the tribunal is for the claimant to appoint his own arbitrator, but that is not one of the requirements of section 34(3) .
Similarly, in the case where the parties have agreed to refer disputes to a named arbitrator the section does not require the claimant to notify the arbitrator that a dispute has arisen; it merely requires him to serve a notice on the respondent requiring him to submit the dispute to that person .
Where the arbitration agreement provides for a sole arbitrator the notice must require the recipient to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator (though there is no requirement on the claimant to propose any names for the respondent\'s consideration), but although in this last case it can be said that a notice to agree is the first step towards constituting the tribunal, I think that all these cases are better viewed as different ways of invoking the arbitration agreement, in other words, of saying to the respondent, `I demand the right to have this dispute decided by arbitration as we agreed and require your co-operation in bringing that about\' .
I approach the present application, therefore, on the basis of the principles which in my judgment are to be derived from the  Nea Agrex  case .
However, before turning to the terms of the letter itself it is necessary to say something about the arbitration agreements .
Each of the bills of lading incorporated the arbitration clause of a charterparty dated 6th December 1995, but apart from that the charter was not identified .
The application was argued before me on the basis that this referred to a charterparty of that date on the Gencon form between Universal Reefers Ltd as owners and Scivik Shipping G.m.b.H .
as charterers .
At the last minute Mr. Picken suggested that there might be some other charter, also dated 6th December 1995, to which the reference might have been intended to apply and which might contain an arbitration clause in different terms .
However, I have seen nothing to support that suggestion, and to be fair it was not seriously pursued .
The material part of the charterparty arbitration clause reads as follows:       "\t .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
Unless the parties agree upon a sole arbitrator, one arbitrator shall be appointed by each party and the arbitrators so appointed shall appoint a third arbitrator, the decision of the three-man tribunal thus constituted or any two of them shall be final .
On receipt by one party of the nomination in writing of the other party\'s arbitrator, that party shall appoint their arbitrator within fourteen days, failing which the decision of the single arbitrator appointed shall be final.  .
Apart from the final sentence, therefore, this clause, although differently worded, provided for arbitration in the same manner as the arbitration clauses in the bills of lading .
In each case the parties contemplated that there should be a sole arbitrator if they could agree on a suitable person, and if not, that there should be a three-man tribunal appointed in the usual way .
There was some argument between the parties over the effect of the purported incorporation of the charterparty arbitration clause into the two bills of lading also which contained their own arbitration clauses, but that is not a question which I think it necessary to resolve for the purposes of this application .
One way or another each of the bills of lading incorporated an agreement to arbitrate which provided for a sole arbitrator or, in default, for a three-man tribunal .
Strictly speaking, therefore, I think that the applicants ought to have begun by giving the kind of notice which would be appropriate in the case of an agreement to refer disputes to a sole arbitrator .
Only if the parties were unable to agree would the agreement for a three-man tribunal come into play .
It is for this reason that I cannot accept Mr. Parsons\' submission that the charterparty arbitration clause contemplated as the primary method of commencing arbitration the nomination by one party of his own arbitrator .
Mr. Picken drew my attention to a passage at page 199 of  Mustill & Boyd  where the learned editors say that a notice by the claimant that he himself has appointed an arbitrator is not a sufficient compliance with the statute .
However, for my own part I doubt whether the position can be stated quite as simply as that in the light of the court\'s approach in the  Nea Agrex  case .
Of course, in one sense it is necessary for the claimants to go further and require the respondents to appoint their arbitrator, but whether they have in fact made it clear that they are requiring the respondents to take some step themselves depends on what one can properly read into the message having regard to its terms and the context in which it was sent .
Waltons\' letter of 9th January 1997 was sent on the day before the one year time limit for commencing proceedings expired, and indeed it expressly referred to the expiry of time .
The letter does not, of course, contain an express notice to the respondents requiring them to agree upon the appointment of a sole arbitrator or even to appoint their own arbitrator; insofar as it expressly required the respondents to do anything it was to acknowledge receipt and confirm that security would be provided .
However, given its terms and the context in which it was sent I find it difficult to believe that the Club did not understand perfectly well what it was intended to convey .
Indeed, when I asked Mr. Picken whether it could possibly be read otherwise than as a notice that the applicants were referring the dispute to arbitration and required the respondents to take appropriate action he was at something of a loss .
In my view the letter gave clear notice to the Club on behalf of the respondents that the applicants were invoking the arbitration agreements in the bills of lading, that they had appointed their own arbitrator, and that they required the respondents to appoint their arbitrator so that the tribunal could be fully constituted and the proceedings got properly under way .
If the arbitration agreement had provided simply for a three-man tribunal, therefore, I should have had little difficulty in holding that the notice, though undoubtedly poorly drafted, was adequate to satisfy the requirements of section 34(3) of the Limitation Act and thus sufficient to commence arbitration for the purposes of Article III, r.6 .
Does it make any difference that Waltons in fact gave the wrong sort of notice .
I do not think it does .
It can be argued that the letter of 9th January does not on any view require the respondents to agree upon a sole arbitrator and that therefore one cannot find within it a notice of the kind required, but if I am right in the view I have taken of the letter, namely that it does by implication require the respondents to appoint their arbitrator, this case is for all practical purposes the same as  Nea Agrex  .
The applicants did make it clear that they were invoking the arbitration agreements and did by implication call on the respondents to take steps in response in order to constitute the tribunal .
In my judgment that was sufficient .
For these reasons I have reached the conclusion that the applicants\' letter to the Club of 9th January 1997 was sufficient to commence arbitration and that consequently their claim is not time-barred .
That makes it unnecessary for me to consider the effect of the letter of 20th January, but in view of the way in which the argument developed I propose to say a few words about it .
Mr. Parsons submitted that whatever may be said about the letter of 9th January, the letter of 20th January did expressly call upon the Club to agree to the appointment of Mr. Baskerville and therefore did on any view expressly comply with the requirements of the Limitation Act .
I think he is right about that .
Mr. Picken sought to persuade me that the letter was wholly ineffective because it really fell between two stools: it could not be read as intending to  commence  arbitration because it refers to  continuing  the proceedings; but neither could it be read as seeking a response to the letter of 9th January because this time Mr. Baskerville was being put forward for the first time as sole arbitrator .
I have to say that I should be very unwilling to take such a technical approach to a letter of this kind, the thrust of which is in my view quite clear .
The applicants are saying that they intend to pursue their claim by way of proceedings and invite the respondents to agree to Mr. Baskerville\'s acting as sole arbitrator .
Not to accept that letter as complying with the statutory requirements would be to take an unduly technical approach to the parties\' communications .
It follows that in my judgment the applicants commenced arbitration on 20th January at the latest and accordingly that if it were necessary for them to make an application for an extension of time that application would fall to be made under section 27 of the Arbitration Act 1950 rather than section 12 of the Arbitration Act 1996.  .
b'Mr Justice Rix : There are before me two originating summonses which between them raise three questions about the jurisdiction of arbitrators .
How, and in particular, when is an arbitration commenced .
How, if at all, can a party to an arbitration agreement join an existing arbitration between other parties to the same arbitration agreement .
Can arbitrators change their minds about giving leave to amend when once they have informed the parties of their decision .
These questions originate in a Memorandum of Agreement on the Saleform 1987 form dated 1 April 1990 made between Charles M Willie & Co (Shipping) Ltd as sellers and George Roussos Sons SA "or company to be nominated" as buyers of the motor vessel  Celtic Ambassador  which, following delivery under the MOA, was renamed the  Smaro  .
In the event the company nominated to take delivery and transfer of the vessel was Ocean Laser Shipping Ltd, and it was in that name that the bill of sale dated 26 April 1990 was made out .
On 21 November 1990 the sellers ("Willie") received a letter from Messrs Holman Fenwick & Willan ("HFW") who said that they acted for George Roussos Sons SA ("Roussos") as buyers of the vessel under the MOA, and enquired about an engine stoppage back in January 1988 .
Correspondence developed in which an allegation was made that Willie had been in breach of the MOA because at the time of delivery the vessel was suffering from average damage affecting class which had led to engine breakdowns in May 1987 and January 1988 (and again after delivery) and which had not been reported to class .
Messrs Swinnerton, Ashley-Claydon ("SAC") were involved in that correspondence as solicitors to Willie .
On 12 March 1992 HFW telexed SAC to invite Willie to agree on the appointment of a single arbitrator under the arbitration agreement contained in clause 15 of the MOA .
HFW continued to say that they represented Roussos as buyers .
Three names were put forward to enable one of them to be agreed as a sole arbitrator .
HFW said that if none of them could be agreed, then Willie should appoint their own arbitrator .
It is common ground that that telex marked the commencement of an arbitration between Roussos and Willie .
Clause 15 of the MOA provided as follows: "15 .
Arbitration    If any dispute should arise in connection with the interpretation and fulfilment of this contract, same shall be decided by arbitration in the city of LONDON and shall be referred to a single Arbitrator appointed by the parties hereto .
If the parties cannot agree upon the appointment of a single arbitrator, the dispute shall be settled by three Arbitrators, each party appointing one Arbitrator, the third being appointed by The London Maritime Arbitrators Association.. .
If one of the parties fails to appoint an Arbitrator - either originally or by way of substitution - for two weeks after the other party having appointed his Arbitrator has sent the party making default notice by mail, cable or telex to make the appointment, the party appointing the third Arbitrator shall, after application from the party having appointed his Arbitrator, also appoint an Arbitrator on behalf of the party making default..." On 18 March 1992, after some intervening correspondence, SAC replied: "Concerning your initiation of arbitration, our clients do not wish any of the 3 gentlemen you have proposed to sit as sole Arbitrator and accordingly when you have effected an appointment of your clients\' arbitrator and given us due notification of the same we shall attend to the appointment of the Respondents\' arbitrator within 14 days thereafter in accordance with clause 15... On 3 April 1992 HFW informed SAC that they had appointed Mr Kazantzis as Roussos\'s arbitrator, and on 6 April SAC replied to say that they had appointed Mr Newcomb as Willies\'s arbitrator .
HFW\'s telex of 20 May 1992 Then on 20 May 1992 there came the following telex from HFW .
It is one of the critical documents in the case and the primary basis for the contention of Ocean Laser Shipping Ltd ("Ocean Laser") that they as well as Roussos had commenced arbitration against Willie (well) before the expiry of the limitation period .
The telex was addressed to Mr Kazantzis and was copied to Mr Newcomb and to SAC, and read as follows: "We refer to our correspondence...appointing you as arbitrator on behalf of G Roussos Sons SA .
You have of course accepted this appointment .
"We should be grateful if, for the avoidance of doubt, you would also accept appointment as arbitrator, again in respect of all disputes arising under the above captioned MOA with Charles M Willie and Co (Shipping) Limited, on behalf of Ocean Laser Shipping Limited. .
To that telex SAC replied by letter dated 21 May 1992 to Mr Kazantzis, with copies to Mr Newcomb and to HFW: "We are in receipt of Messrs Holman Fenwick and Willan\'s telex yesterday in which they purport to extend your appointment to cover any claims by a party identified as Ocean Laser Shipping Limited .
"Please be advised that 1 .
We have no idea who Ocean Laser Shipping Limited .
2 .
The MOA dated the 1st April 1990 is a contract between our clients and G Roussos Sons SA who have initiated this arbitration .
3 .
Our clients have no contract and consequently there is no agreement to arbitration with Ocean Laser Shipping Limited .
"Thus we dispute the validity of your appointment on behalf of this company. .
On 3 June 1992 Mr Kazantzis replied to HFW with copies to Mr Newcomb and SAC to say that he was willing to accept appointment as Ocean Laser\'s arbitrator, but that in the light of SAC\'s letter he looked forward to further advice about the contractual basis of his appointment .
It would have been easy enough for either Willie or Ocean Laser (or Roussos) to have pointed out to their respective solicitors (if they were unaware) as well as arbitrators that Ocean Laser were the ultimate buyers of the vessel under the MOA .
Unfortunately, however, they do not appear to have done so .
On the limited evidence before me, I do not know why that was so .
The affidavit of Mr Swinnerton merely states that this correspondence was being handled by his partner Mr Ashley-Claydon, and adds "I assume that he did not have a copy of the Bill of Sale before him" .
Willie, however, would have known the true position, as of course would those instructing HFW .
Moreover, Mr Ashley-Claydon presumably had a copy of the MOA, in which the buyers were stated to be not merely Roussos, but Roussos "or company to be nominated" .
If the matter had been sorted out at that time, then none of the ensuing complications would have occurred .
As it is, SAC\'s reaction to the appointment by Ocean Laser of Mr Kazantzis as their arbitrator went unanswered .
In due course, but not until 5 November 1993 Roussos and Ocean Laser served their points of claim on Willie .
Paragraph 1 pleaded that Roussos had agreed to purchase the vessel under the MOA "on its own behalf and or on behalf of" Ocean Laser: both claimants were defined as the "buyers" for the purposes of the pleading .
On receipt of these points of claim SAC wrote to the arbitrators and HFW as follows: "In May 1992 our opponents  [1]  sought to appoint Mr Kazantzis as Arbitrator on behalf of Ocean Laser Shipping Limited and we made clear in our letter dated 21st May 1992 that neither we nor our clients had any idea as to the identity of Ocean Laser and that there was no agreement to arbitrate with that company .
"Nothing further has been provided by our opponents at all as to Ocean Laser and accordingly our clients\' straightforward position is that there is no arbitration agreement with this company and Sellers and so no basis for you and your co-arbitrator to deal with any claim this company may have .
"As you and your co-arbitrator will see, no explanation at all is offered in the Points of claim as to the alleged involvement of Ocean Laser and we can see no basis at all for this party to be included as a Claimant and any Defence served by us will be to the claim of Messrs G Roussos Sons SA only. .
It appears from this letter that SAC had consulted their clients, Willie, about the purported claim of Ocean Laser .
Since Willie must have known that they had transferred their vessel to Ocean Laser, it is hard to understand their "straightforward position" .
Be that as it may, HFW\'s reply is the other critical document relied on by Ocean Laser as supporting their claim to have commenced arbitration proceedings against Willie .
HFW\'s letter dated 12 November 1993 .
HFW responded to SAC\'s letter by the following letter dated 12 November 1993 .
It was addressed to the two arbitrators, and copied to SAC .
It read: "We refer to Swinnerton Ashley-Claydon\'s letter to you of 8th November relating to the question of the jurisdiction to deal with any claim by Ocean Laser .
"The Memorandum of Agreement states in lines 1 to 2 that G Roussos Sons SA, of 1 Dimosthenous Street, Piraeus, Greece or company to be nominated hereinafter called the "Buyer", have today bought Motor Vessel "CELTIC AMBASSADOR" .
"For this reason we appointed Mr Kazantzis as our Clients\' Arbitrator both on behalf of G Roussos Sons SA and on behalf of Ocean Laser Shipping Limited .
The Points of Claim further provide that the first claimant, i.e .
G Roussos Sons SA on its own behalf and/or on behalf of Ocean Laser Shipping Limited as Buyers agreed to purchase the vessel .
"No doubt if Messrs Swinnerton an/or the Tribunal require further clarification of the point, you will let us know. .
On 29 November 1993 HFW served an amended points of claim on behalf of Roussos and Ocean Laser .
The amendments were not significant .
On 18 February 1994 points of defence were served on behalf of Willie .
They were headed as between only Roussos and Willie, and began with a "Note" as follows: "The present tribunal (Messrs Newcomb and Kazantzis) has been appointed and has jurisdiction only in respect of disputes between the Claimants and the Respondents named above .
If arbitration has been commenced on behalf of Ocean Laser Shipping Limited, the tribunal is not complete in respect of that arbitration .
The present pleading is served in respect only of the claim by G Roussos Sons SA and without prejudice to the Respondents\' case that the tribunal has no jurisdiction over the claim of Ocean Laser Shipping Limited. .
The Note did not say that arbitration had  not  been commenced between Ocean Laser and Willie, but raised the question whether it had been .
Paragraph 1 of the points of defence then stated that it was not admitted that Roussos had made the MOA on behalf of Ocean Laser and that no admission was made as to which if either of them was a party to the MOA .
If arbitration had been commenced on behalf of Ocean Laser, and if, as Willie\'s prefaced Note submitted, the tribunal was not complete in respect of that arbitration, the fault lay with Willie, for they were obliged either to agree a sole arbitrator or to appoint their own .
It has not been submitted to me on behalf of Willie that Ocean Laser was not a party to the MOA or not entitled to invoke its arbitration clause .
Thus even after HFW had finally explained the basis of Ocean Laser\'s joining with Roussos in making claim under the MOA, Willie continued to throw down their jurisdictional gauntlet .
It might be thought that any difficulty caused by the fact that Ocean Laser\'s appointment of Mr Kazantzis came shortly after Roussos\'s appointment would have been sorted out at that time at latest, but apparently it was not to be .
Instead, the arbitration made slow progress .
So much so that, when on 6 April 1998 Roussos and Ocean Laser applied to re-amend their points of claim, Willie responded on 14 April 1998 by applying to the arbitrators to dismiss Roussos\'s claim for want of prosecution .
A hearing took place on 6 and 15 May 1998 .
In the meantime Mr Lugg had been appointed as third arbitrator .
At that hearing the following matters were argued: (i) Whether the arbitrators should strike out Roussos\'s claim; (ii) Whether Ocean Laser were parties to the arbitration (albeit it was recognised that the arbitrators ultimately did not have power to decide their own jurisdiction); (iii) Whether, if Ocean Laser were parties, their claim should also be dismissed for want of prosecution; and (iv) Whether Roussos and/or Ocean Laser should have leave to amend (in fact to re-re-amend) their points of claim .
It was agreed that the arbitrators would give an unreasoned decision in the first instance on the amendment application, without delaying until the time when they would render a reasoned decision on the other issues .
On 21 May 1998 the tribunal made an unreasoned order allowing the proposed amendments .
Mr Kazantzis wrote a letter on behalf of the tribunal informing the parties\' solicitors that: "We are satisfied that the appropriate course would be to allow the amendments as pleaded. .
On 14 July 1998 the tribunal published their "Interim Final Award" wherein they held that Willie\'s application for dismissal of the claim for want of prosecution failed, and that the tribunal had jurisdiction to determine the claims of Ocean Laser .
On 23 July 1998 the tribunal had a surprise for the parties, when Mr Kazantzis sent them a letter to say that on further reconsideration they had changed their minds about one of the amendments which they had previously allowed .
This was paragraph 4A of the re-re-amended points of claim, in which Roussos and Ocean Laser pleaded a telex from brokers dated 30 March 1990 (the day before the MOA was signed) wherein it was stated that "main engine had been operated without problems for years" .
The claimants wished to rely on this telex to found a misrepresentation by Willie inducing the MOA .
In a letter to the tribunal dated 24 July 1998 HFW protested at this change of heart, saying that they could not imagine on what basis the tribunal had reversed their decision, but that in any event the tribunal had no power to alter their decision .
On 28 July 1998 Mr Kazantzis replied on behalf of the tribunal to explain their decision further, as follows: "As explained, our original decision in respect of the application for amendment of Clause 4(a) of the Points of Claim was made before we had completed our comprehensive review of all the papers .
When we did so, it seemed to us we ought to exercise our discretion against allowing the amendment .
"Although a plea of misrepresentation was already on the record paragraph 4(a), as presently worded pleads a fresh misrepresentation not previously alleged, which will entail a new factual enquiry .
"It is quite common for arbitrators to reconsider interlocutory decisions .
Indeed it is sometimes a cause of complaint that in arbitration procedure interlocutory decisions are not as firm as they are in the Courts .
However in some ways we consider this a strength rather than a weakness although this flexibility should not be abused .
We hope that you would not consider that we have done so in this case... "If you wish to press the matter we will of course consider any further representations you may wish to make with a view to persuading the Tribunal to changing its mind yet again..." The claimants did wish the arbitrators to reconsider the matter and therefore a further hearing was held on 23 September 1998 .
On 1 October the arbitrators published their "Second Interim Final Award" in which they held that the claimants\' application to amend so as to insert paragraph 4A of the re-re-amended points of claim failed .
They gave reasons for their decision .
Although those reasons, which went beyond the reasons given previously, were before me, they were not specifically referred to in the submissions of counsel .
They may, however, hereafter be the subject of further debate, and therefore I shall say nothing about them .
In the meantime the decisions of the arbitrators had led both Willie on the one hand and Roussos and Ocean Laser on the other hand to issue their respective originating summonses so as to bring before the Court the question of the arbitrators\' jurisdiction .
Willie\'s originating summons was dated 21 July 1998 and brought solely against Ocean Laser .
It asked for various declarations, primarily that Ocean Laser had not validly or at all commenced an arbitration against them  "in that at no stage have they served upon the Plaintiffs a notice calling upon them to appoint an arbitrator or to agree such an appointment. .
Roussos and Ocean Laser issued their originating summons against Willie on 13 August 1998 .
It asked for declarations that the arbitrators\' decision of 23 July 1998 purporting to reverse their decision of 21 May 1998 allowing the amendment was made without jurisdiction and that their decision of 21 May 1998 was final and binding .
Had Ocean Laser commenced arbitration against Willie in 1992 or alternatively 1993 .
This was the first issue debated before me .
Although it was rightly submitted that I was only concerned with jurisdiction and not matters of time bar, it was common ground that if I were to hold that Ocean Laser had commenced arbitration against Willie by at latest the time of HFW\'s letter of 12 November 1993, then Ocean Laser\'s claim was not time barred .
Argument before me proceeded on the basis that no Arbitration Act before the Arbitration Act 1996 (the "1996 Act") contained any provision relating to the commencement of arbitration [2]  and that the provisions of section 34(3) of the Limitation Act 1980 (the "1980 Act") were therefore to be applied by analogy .
Section 34(3) provides as follows: "For the purposes of this Act and of any other limitation enactment an arbitration shall be  treated  as being commenced -  (a) when one party to the arbitration serves on the other party or parties a notice requiring him or them to appoint an arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator; ..." (emphasis added) .
The predecessor to section 34(3) of the 1980 Act was section 27(3) of the Limitation Act 1939 (the "1939 Act") which provided as follows: "For the purpose of this Act...an arbitration shall be deemed to be commenced when one party to the arbitration serves on the other party or parties a notice requiring him or them to appoint an arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator, or, where the arbitration agreement provides that the reference shall be to a person named or designated in the agreement, requiring him or them to submit to the person so named or designated. .
It was this latter provision that was considered by the Court of Appeal in the leading case of Nea Agrex SA v. Baltic Shipping Co Ltd [1976] 1 QB 933 .
There charterers relied on the following passage in a letter to owners as constituting the requisite notice for the commencement of arbitration:  "Please advise your proposals in order to settle this matter, or name your arbitrators. .
It is important to note that the arbitration agreement between the parties in that case called for a single arbitrator, so that the charterers were mistaken to call upon the owners to "name your arbitrators" .
The one year Hague Rules time bar applicable to the parties\' charter expired between the time of the charterers\' letter just quoted and anything else that might have been relied on as the commencement by the charterers of an arbitration .
The Court of Appeal held that the letter sufficed to commence arbitration .
In doing so, the Court did not apply the Limitation Act directly, but by analogy .
The principal argument deployed on behalf of the owners as to why the letter was insufficient was that the request to appoint an arbitrator was contingent on the absence of settlement proposals .
A secondary argument was that the charterers had used the wrong formula,  ie  had failed to use the form of words applicable to a tribunal composed of only a single arbitrator .
The Court rejected the first argument on the ground that the charterers\' letter was sufficiently clear to be interpreted as a request for arbitration made there and then coupled with a willingness to come to an amicable settlement if satisfactory settlement proposals were made (see Lord Denning MR at 945D/F, Goff LJ at 951C, Shaw LJ at 955A) .
The second argument was rejected also, on the ground that the use of the wrong formula made the notice irregular, but not a nullity ( per  Goff LJ at 950H) or that it was sufficient that the notice should communicate an intention to resort to arbitration and that the other party "should do something on his part in that regard" ( per  Shaw LJ at 954H) .
Lord Denning did not deal with the second argument expressly, but appears to have wrapped it up in his general ratio that the letter should be construed "as a request for the difference to be submitted to arbitration" (at 945F) .
It was, I think, the combined force of the owners\' two arguments that led the members of the Court of Appeal to consider to what extent the notice necessary to commence arbitration should be expressly in the form required by the statute .
Before me, there have been opposing arguments as to whether such a notice must be expressly and precisely in the terms of the statutory language .
The question has assumed particular importance in this case for two reasons .
The first is that, unlike the position in Nea Agrex, there is here no express language in HFW\'s telex or letter about the appointment by Willie of any arbitrator .
The second is that in a recent decision Judge Jack QC, sitting as a deputy High Court Judge, has decided that express and precise language must be employed for a notice to be effective: see Vosnoc Ltd v. Transglobal Projects Ltd [1998] 1 WLR 101 .
Lord Denning began as though the conditions for the commencement of arbitration were to be exactly followed, even though the Limitation Act was being applied only by way of analogy .
Thus he said (at 944F/G):  "Whilst it is undesirable to introduce too much technicality, I think it is important that there should be clear rules as to when an arbitration is deemed to have commenced .
There must, of course, be an arbitration agreement, that is, "a written agreement to submit present or future differences to arbitration, whether an arbitrator is named therein or not": see section 32 of the Arbitration Act 1950 .
In this charterparty clause 23 was such an agreement .
It is deemed to include a provision that the reference shall be to a single arbitrator: see section 6 of the Act of 1950 .
"In order to commence the arbitration, there must, I think, be a notice in writing served by one party on the other party .
This notice must contain a requirement .
It must require the other party to do one or other of two things: either (1) "to appoint an arbitrator" or (2) "to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator." .
Almost immediately, however, Lord Denning started to consider what the position would be if the notice\'s "requirement" that the other party do something was not spelled out expressly .
Thus at 944H, in considering the case of a reference to two arbitrators, he said: "In such a case the arbitration is deemed to commence when the one party,  expressly or by implication , requires the other party to appoint his arbitrator .
If he simply says "I require the difference to be submitted to arbitration in accordance with our agreement" that is sufficient to commence the arbitration: because it is by implication a request to the other to appoint his arbitrator" [emphasis added] .
Similarly, in discussing the case of a reference to a single arbitrator, Lord Denning said (at 945B):  "It seems to me that a notice which says "I require the difference between us to be submitted to arbitration " is sufficient to commence the arbitration: because it is  by implication  a request to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator" [emphasis added] .
Lord Denning continued (at 945C/F): "So in any case a simple notice in writing requiring the difference to be submitted to arbitration is deemed to be commencement of the arbitration .
"Apply these considerations to the present case .
The charterers\' agents on May 31, 1972, presented to the owners\' agents a detailed claim for damages demanding immediate payment, and then they said: "Please advise your proposal in order to settle this matter or name your arbitrators. .
"Mr. Rokison says that that request is equivocal .
It gives the shipowners an alternative .
It does not amount to an unequivocal request for arbitration .
So it cannot be deemed to be the commencement of the arbitration .
That seems to me too legalistic an approach .
In a commercial dispute, a letter requesting an arbitration should not be construed too strictly .
The writer should not be impaled on a time bar because he writes in polite and courteous terms, or because he leaves open the possibility of settlement by agreement .
Suppose the charters had written to the owners: "Unless you are prepared to settle the matter amicably, we must ask you to agree to an arbitrator. .
That would, to my mind, be quite sufficient .
When such a letter follows upon a genuine claim promptly made, it should be interpreted as a request for arbitration - a request made then and there - coupled with a willingness to come to an amicable settlement .
The arbitration is deemed to commence with the sending of the letter, and time no longer runs against him .
"Likewise with the letter in this case, it can and should be construed as a request for the difference to be submitted to arbitration - with a saving that the request will be withdrawn if a settlement can be reached .
That is sufficient to commence the arbitration. .
For my part, I would stress Lord Denning\'s deprecation of too legalistic an approach to, or too strict a construction of, the notice necessary to the commencement of an arbitration .
It would be sufficient in his view if the notice can be construed, expressly or implicitly, as a request for the dispute to be submitted to arbitration .
Goff LJ began his consideration of this point by raising a question regarding the proper construction of section 27(3) of the 1939 Act itself .
Thus at 949H/950C he said: "That section poses some problems and there appears to be no authority as to its construction .
It is, as the charterers submit, a "deeming section," but the question is whether, as they say, the methods prescribed are deemed to be sufficient without prejudice to any other way in which arbitration may in fact be commenced, or whether the statutory methods are the only ones for purposes of limitation .
In my view, the latter is correct, because the steps envisaged by the section are such as by their very nature would commence an arbitration and do not require to be deemed such, although I agree with Lord Denning M.R .
that the necessary request may be implied .
However, it is not necessary to reach a final decision on that point .
"The section I think clearly envisages that a party who wishes to commence arbitration will, when there are to be arbitrators on both sides, call upon his opponent "to appoint an arbitrator," and when the reference is to a single arbitrator will call upon him "to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator. .
However, if he adopts the wrong course, that would not in my judgment make his requisition a nullity, or prevent arbitration commencing .
It would be no more than an irregularity capable of being remedied. .
In that passage it seems to me that Goff LJ is saying that (a) he does not have to reach a final decision as to whether section 27(3) is exclusive or inclusive as to the conditions for commencing arbitration; (b) even if section 27(3) is exclusive, he agrees with Lord Denning that the necessary request specified in the section may be implied; and (c) in as much as the express language of requisition is in the wrong terms, the effect is not to render the notice ineffective, merely irregular .
Goff LJ appears to me there to be going beyond permitting the necessary request to be implied as well as express, for the concept of remedying a defect in language is not a process of construction or implication .
That concept seems to me to be rather akin to and derived from the general principle in civil procedure that many breaches of the Rules of the Supreme Court may be regarded as mere irregularities which can be cured in the discretion of the court, as distinct from failures of condition precedent which undermine the essential validity of some document .
I am diffident whether such a concept can be introduced into a consensual process such as arbitration: but it underlines what seems to me to be one of the ultimate lessons of the case, namely that the wording of a notice in writing requisite for the commencement of arbitration is not to be regarded strictly or formulaically .
Shaw LJ also began with some observations on the effect of section 27(3), but for his part he thought that the section did not purport to lay down an exclusive rule for the commencement of arbitrations .
He said (at 954E/955A): "It is to be observed that this is a deeming provision designed to ascertain for the purposes of the Limitation Act 1939 the point of time at which an arbitration is to be regarded as having commenced .
It does not exclude other direct means of establishing the commencement of an arbitration .
If a general principle is to be extracted from section 27(3) it seems to me that where a dispute arises which is within the scope of a pre-existing agreement to submit disputes to arbitration, then an arbitration is commenced when one party gives notice to the other party intimating that he proposes to invoke the arbitration agreement and requiring that other party to take some step towards setting an arbitration in train .
By analogy with the procedure prescribed in section 27(4) of the Act of 1939, such a notice must be in writing and served in accordance with the rules there set out .
The commencement of the arbitration would coincide with the service of the notice upon the other party .
"The giving of such notice is a matter inter partes and is a procedural and not a decisive step .
Accordingly, its form and terms do not call for an excessively strict scrutiny .
If, in substance, a party communicates (i) an intention to resort to arbitration and (ii) a requirement that the other party should do something on his part in that regard, this will in general suffice to define the commencement of the arbitration or, for the purposes of article III, r.6, of the Hague Rules, the date when "suit is brought. .
"Applying these principles to the present case, I would hold that the letter of May 31, 1972, addressed to the shipowners was sufficient to mark the commencement of the arbitration .
I read that letter as declaring that arbitration is to be resorted to..." Thus Shaw LJ agreed with the other members of the Court that the notice\'s terms should not be construed over-strictly, and that it would suffice as long as its  substance  was to communicate an intention to invoke the reference of a dispute to arbitration and that its recipient was expected to act upon it .
The issue was revisited in the following year in Surrendra Overseas Ltd v. Government of Sri Lanka [1977] 1 WLR 565 .
The claimants\' letter there stated (at 570A): "In view of the attitude taken by charterers in their calculation of lay-time, owners will be putting the matter to arbitration .
We will be advising you concerning details of the arbitrator appointed in due course. .
Mr Justice Kerr held that this letter failed to commence arbitration, since it merely told the charterers that they could sit back and await developments .
He added (at 571F/G): "It may be that if the [owners] had merely said "We hereby require this dispute to be referred to arbitration," the position would be different .
It might then be said that they had also impliedly added: "We therefore require you to appoint your arbitrator. .
I will assume that this would be so, though I do not so decide, any more than did the majority in the  Nea Agrex  case .
But even on this assumption I think that this letter does not go far enough .
It merely referred to an arbitration in the future and contains no present requirement of any kind .
For the purposes of limitation the commencement of an arbitration must be clear and unequivocal .
This letter is vague and couched in the future tense. .
In The Rimon [1981] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 640 Robert Goff J referred to Lord Denning\'s judgment in Nea Agrex in holding that two telexes, one of which said "...settling of claims of both sides will be done by arbitrators according to gafta rules" and the other of which said "the point...shall be decided by arbitrators", each amounted to an implied request to the receiving party to appoint his arbitrator, and therefore to the commencement of arbitration .
That is an actual decision by an eminent commercial judge, that an implied request suffices to commence arbitration .
It may have been observed that when section 34(3) of the 1980 Act re-enacted section 27(3) of the 1939 Act in almost identical terms, the word "deemed" ("shall be deemed to be commenced") in the 1939 Act had been changed to the word "treated" in the 1980 Act ("shall be treated as being commenced") .
It is hard to think that that change does not in some way arise out of the difference of opinion expressed by Goff LJ and Shaw LJ in Nea Agrex: but it is not easy to say how, if at all, the effect of the section was intended to have been thereby altered .
Vosnoc Ltd v. Transglobal Projects Ltd [1998] 1WLR 101 is a case on the 1980 Act .
Its facts are essentially identical to those of Nea Agrex, save that the material part of the letter relied on as a notice commencing arbitration was in the following terms (see at 104C): "By this letter the dispute between our respective companies is referred to the arbitration of three arbitrators in London pursuant to the provisions of clause 17.8 of the contract of affreightment such arbitration to be conducted in accordance with the rules of the London arbitrators. .
Thus there was no express request to appoint an arbitrator, although it seems that Judge Jack QC was prepared to view the letter as an implied request to appoint .
However, having considered the Nea Agrex case, he concluded that he was not bound to follow Lord Denning\'s view that a notice of request to appoint could be implied as well as express, since, even though it was in his view part of Lord Denning\'s  ratio decidendi , it was not, he thought, shared by the other members of the Court of Appeal .
He regarded Goff LJ as saying that, although he agreed with Lord Denning, he did not have to decide that point .
On the point of principle, he then reasoned as follows (at 110A/F): "Sections 27(3) of the Act of 1939 and 34(3) of the Act of 1980 spell out what is to be done to commence an arbitration and thereby to stop limitation running...Further, although the correct construction of a statutory provision may be affected by its context, if a statutory provision provides for a notice requiring something, it is ordinarily to be expected that the notice must do so expressly .
"There is, I think, a contrast between the UNCITRAL Model Law and the English statutes, which shows a difference in approach between them .
English law has taken the approach that something more must be done than to request that the matter be referred to arbitration .
A step must be taken towards getting the arbitration under way, a step towards the appointment of the tribunal... "I can see factors of policy that point the other way .
Thus many commercial men would think that an arbitration is commenced by giving notice of arbitration, and that this should be sufficient for the purposes of the Hague Rules .
Many, many arbitrations are held in England involving foreign parties .
When the possibility of arbitration arises they may or may not have English solicitors to advise them .
They are otherwise unlikely to be familiar with the provisions of the English law as to limitation .
There is nothing sophisticated about the implication made by Lord Denning M.R .
in the  Nea Agrex  case [1976] Q.B .
933 .
Provided the notice makes plain that the arbitration is to commence at the date of the notice, it is plain that the respondent is required to do what the arbitration agreement provides, namely to appoint his arbitrator .
However, these are reasons for framing the statutory provisions in another way, rather than for reading them in another way .
English law, has it seems to me, taken the policy decision that, to stop time running, the notice must take a step further than a requirement to arbitrate. .
The UNCITRAL rule relating to the commencement of arbitration referred to in that passage is contained in article 21 of the Model Law and provides: "Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings in respect of a particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration is received by the respondent. .
Before turning to the submissions of the parties before me, I should also mention what MUSTILL & BOYD on Commercial Arbitration, 2nd Edition, 1989, have to say on the subject .
The following is found at page 199: "It is important to bear in mind that each of the forms of notice contemplated by section 34(3) is concerned with the appointment of an arbitrator by the defendant .
A notice by the claimant that he himself has appointed an arbitrator is not a sufficient compliance with the statute, and still less is a mere notice of claim .
The latter might, depending on the terms of the contract, be sufficient to prevent the claim from becoming barred by a contractual limitation clause, but it would not be relevant to a statutory time limit. .
Moreover, footnote 4 on the same page, in citing Nea Agrex, adds: "This case probably represents the limit of the Court\'s indulgence: see  Surrendra Overseas Ltd v. Government of Sri Lanka ...Both cases leave open the question whether \'I require this dispute to be referred to arbitration\' is sufficient. .
On behalf of Ocean Laser, Mr Steven Berry submits that Vosnoc was wrongly decided: that an implied request to appoint an arbitrator suffices and that Nea Agrex decided as much; that the telex of 21 May 1992 or the letter of 12 November 1993 constituted such an implied request; that in any event the Limitation Act was relevant only to the question of limitation, with which I was not concerned, and not to the question of jurisdiction, which was the only question before me; and that even if the Act was directly relevant, it was not exhaustive as to the means by which an arbitration could be commenced .
On behalf of Willie, Mr Michael Nolan submitted precisely to the contrary: that Vosnoc was rightly decided and only an express request would suffice; that in any event neither telex nor letter could be construed as an implied request, and that even if either of them would otherwise be construed as such, it could not take effect since it was addressed not to Willie but merely copied to Willie\'s solicitors in the Roussos arbitration, SAC, who had no authority from Willie to receive a notice commencing a further arbitration on behalf of Ocean Laser; and that the Limitation Act laid down the sole means by which an arbitration could be commenced .
I must therefore first decide whether Vosnoc was rightly decided .
It is with respect for the considerations which led Judge Jack QC to determine as he did that I must state that in my judgment an implied request will suffice, and that Nea Agrex is either binding authority or at any rate contains powerfully authoritative dicta to that effect .
I would seek to put the matter in the following way .
First, it seems to me that in Vosnoc sight was lost of the fact that the Limitation Act is not directly relevant to the question of the commencement of arbitration, but only relevant by analogy .
Thus it was a cornerstone of Judge Jack\'s reasoning that - "if a statutory provision provides for a notice requiring something, it is ordinarily to be expected that the notice must do so expressly" (at 110B) .
So also Judge Jack rejected the policy considerations for a more flexible rule on the ground that - "these are reasons for framing the statutory provisions in another way, rather than for reading them in another way" (at 110F) .
This may have reflected the way in which the matter was argued before him, but it should be recalled that in Nea Agrex, which was also concerned with a one year time bar under article III, rule 6 of the Hague Rules, the Court of Appeal were satisfied that the development of their principles for the commencement of arbitration was derived only by analogy from the 1939 Act .
Secondly, those policy considerations for a more flexible rule are very powerful .
Whether because he regarded himself as directly applying a statutory code, or because he was influenced by Mr Justice Kerr\'s dictum in Surrendra Overseas Ltd v. Government of Sri Lanka [1977] 1 WLR at 570 that "For the purposes of limitation the commencement of an arbitration must be clear and unequivocal", a dictum strongly relied on by Mr Nolan before me, Judge Jack felt unable to give weight to those policy considerations .
In my judgment, however, they indicate that a strict, formulaic, approach is undesirable, unless statute or precedent renders it inevitable .
There is no sign that the more flexible approach adopted both in the decision and the dicta of Nea Agrex has led to any difficulties over the last twenty years .
Thirdly, Nea Agrex is to my mind authority and probably binding authority that an implied request, will suffice, indeed that the question is not even a matter of pure implication, but rather whether the notice sufficiently, or in substance, makes clear that the respondent is expected to act on the claimant\'s submission of a dispute to arbitration, on his invocation of the arbitration clause, so as to participate in the submission of the relevant dispute to arbitration .
In their different ways, all three judges in Nea Agrex made it clear, as part of the reasoning necessary for their decision, that express language in the terms of the Act was unnecessary .
Fourthly, and even if Nea Agrex were not authority binding on me, I do not think that the 1980 Act requires an express request .
Even if the statute were to apply directly, and I have stated above that Nea Agrex appears to me to be authority for the proposition that it applies only by way of analogy, I do not find in it a requirement of express language .
It is a matter of general principle that what can be done expressly can be done by implication .
Thus it is not the wording of the statute itself, but only the interpretation of it which calls for express language .
I do not see why that interpretation should take precedence over cogent points of policy pushing in a different direction which accords with general principle .
Fifthly, I think that Shaw LJ was right in Nea Agrex to say that the deeming provision of the 1939 Act showed that section 27(3) - "does not exclude other direct means of establishing the commencement of an arbitration" (at 954E) .
This point, as to which Goff LJ opined to the contrary and Lord Denning was silent, did not have to be decided in Nea Agrex since there was nothing there on which the commencement of arbitration could be founded except the disputed letter .
The same position applied in Vosnoc, where there is no reference to the point and it may not even have been argued .
In the present case, however, it was clear by at latest the receipt of HFW\'s letter dated 12 November 1993 that Ocean Laser had appointed Mr Kazantzis as their arbitrator, notified Willie\'s solicitors of that appointment, served points of claim purportedly in pursuance of that reference, and explained to Willie\'s solicitors that their reference derived from their status as party to the MOA: and all against the background of an ongoing arbitration raising an identical or substantially identical claim in the name of Roussos .
This led Mr Berry to submit on behalf of Ocean Laser that an arbitration had been commenced by Ocean Laser against Willie in any event .
I shall consider the facts relevant to that submission below .
For the moment, I express the view that even a direct application of the 1980 Act, and a fortiori an application by way of analogy, does not exclude the possibility of showing that arbitration has been commenced by means other than a notice requiring appointment or agreement of an arbitrator .
I asked Mr Nolan when an arbitration which no one would dispute was under way had been commenced in the absence of such a notice .
His answer was to say that arbitration had commenced at latest when the respondent appointed or agreed in the appointment of an arbitrator: but not because of the Limitation Act, but because the respondent was then estopped from denying that he had submitted the relevant dispute to arbitration or from disputing the tribunal\'s jurisdiction on the ground of the absence of a Limitation Act notice .
For my part, I would prefer a more direct approach and say that a claimant had commenced arbitration, at any rate in a two or three arbitrator situation, by appointing his own arbitrator .
On the authority of Tradax Export SA v. Volkswagenwerk AG [1970] 1 QB 537 such appointment requires the consent of the arbitrator to act as such and in addition notification of his appointment to the respondent .
In my view such notification can be regarded as an implied request to the respondent to appoint his own arbitrator, just as Lord Denning had said that "I require the difference between us to be submitted to arbitration" should be regarded as such a request: indeed the hypothesis under consideration appears as an a fortiori case .
But whether that be so or not, where the claimant has actually completed the appointment of his own arbitrator by notifying the respondent party, I do not see why such an appointment should not be regarded as in every sense a commencement of arbitration .
Under the 1939 Act the language was "shall be deemed to be commenced" and under the 1980 Act this phrase had become "shall be treated as being commenced" .
I have suggested above that the alteration appears to be an attempt to get away from a word which had led to a difference of views in Nea Agrex, but that it is difficult to say what the effect of the change was intended to be .
I am inclined to think that this language still allows an arbitration to be commenced in other ways .
The implication is that the arbitration shall be treated as being commenced, even if it had not in fact been commenced .
In ordinary language one would not or at least might not regard the mere request to another party to appoint his arbitrator as marking the commencement of an arbitration .
Hence the need for statutory language making it so .
But I do not see why the appointment of a claimant\'s arbitrator has to be "treated" as the commencement of an arbitration, when it is, in my judgment, simply that .
It seems to me, however, that I do not have to decide the point .
But if the view  I have just expressed is wrong, then it would to my mind amply demonstrate why it is necessary to permit what Lord Denning and Goff LJ called an implied request: a rule for the commencement of arbitration which could not encompass the notification to a respondent that a claimant had appointed his own arbitrator would seem to me to be lacking in realism .
I therefore turn to the particular facts before me, and ask first, whether the documents relied on amounted to an implied request to appoint an arbitrator, or amounted in substance to such a request .
In this connection both parties were content to accept the relevance of what was said in Mannai Investment Co Ltd v. Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd  [1997] 2 WLR 945  .
There a majority in the House of Lords held that a tenant\'s notice to determine a tenancy was effective even though it had mistakenly referred to 12 January instead of 13 January .
Lord Steyn said at 961G/962F: "(2) The question is not how the landlord understood the notices .
The construction of the notices must be approached objectively .
The issue is how a reasonable recipient would have understood the notices .
And in considering this question the notices must be construed taking into account the relevant objective contextual scene... "(3) It is important not to lose sight of the purpose of a notice under the break clause .
It serves one purpose only: to inform the landlord that the tenant has decided to determine the lease in accordance with the right reserved .
That purpose must be relevant to the construction and validity of the notice .
Prima facie one would expect that if a notice unambiguously conveys a decision to determine a court may nowadays ignore immaterial errors which would not have misled a reasonable recipient... "(4) There is no justification for placing notices under a break clause in a unique category .
Making due allowance for contextual differences, such notices belong to the general class of unilateral notices served under contractual rights reserved, e.g .
notices to quit, notices to determine licences and notices to complete:  Delta Vale Properties Ltd. v. Mills  [1990] 1 W.L.R .
445, 454B-G. To those examples may be added notices under charter parties, contracts of affreightment, and so forth .
Even if such notices under contractual rights reserved contain errors they may be valid if they are "sufficiently clear and unambiguous to leave a reasonable recipient in no reasonable doubt as to how and when they are intended to operate:" the  Delta  case, at p.454E-G,  per  Slade L.J .
and adopted by Stocker L.J .
and Bingham L.J...." That of course was said in the context of a notice which was expressly a notice to determine a tenancy, but which specified the wrong date .
In that respect, there is a direct analogy with the problem in Nea Agrex, viz the failure to refer to agreeing a single arbitrator .
Nevertheless, the parties accepted the relevance and applicability of the test of whether Ocean Laser\'s communications  were in their context sufficiently clear and unambiguous to leave a reasonable recipient in no reasonable doubt that they were intended to operate as a call for the appointment of an arbitrator .
I come first to HFW\'s telex of 20 May 1992 .
That began by express reference to Mr Kazantzis\'s appointment on behalf of Roussos and thus by inference to the Roussos/Willie arbitration in which Willie had already appointed Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator .
The telex was also expressly copied to Mr Newcomb .
In that context the telex asked Mr Kazantzis also to accept appointment as arbitrator in respect of disputes under the MOA on behalf of Ocean Laser .
It was copied to SAC .
For present purposes I ignore the additional issue as to whether a communication to SAC is good enough to stand for a communication to Willie, and I assume that it is .
In my judgment there can be no reasonable doubt that Willie were intended to regard this communication as a notice to respond by similarly appointing Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator in respect of Ocean Laser\'s claims under the MOA as well as in respect of Roussos\'s claims, and I have no doubt that that was how Willie in fact understood it, and rightly so .
I do not suppose that the parties stopped to analyse the question of whether this was the commencement of a new arbitration, or whether it was an extension of the existing arbitration .
At any rate, until I raised that question in court, the issue had been looked upon and argued in terms of whether or not a new arbitration had been commenced .
In those terms, it was in theory possible, but I would have regarded it as eccentric to the point of unreasonableness, for Willie to have appointed a different arbitrator than Mr Newcomb .
Similarly, it was in theory possible that Willie would have wanted to agree a reference to a single arbitrator in the terms of clause 15: but in the light of their refusal to do so in the case of the Roussos arbitration, that would have been eccentric too, and wholly beyond the expectations, I am sure, of either party .
The fact, therefore, that, by impliedly or in substance calling upon Willie to appoint Mr Newcomb in respect of Ocean Laser\'s claims as well, Ocean Laser may have been applying the wrong formula in their invocation of arbitration, does not seem to me to matter at all: see Nea Agrex and Mannai, as well as The Petr Schmidt [1995] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 202 at 207  per  Potter J .
Although, as Lord Steyn said in Mannai, the test is an objective one, I think it is legitimate to check my conclusions on the construction of the telex by observing how SAC in fact reacted to it .
Their reaction is to be found in their letter to Mr Kazantzis, copied to Mr Newcomb and HFW, dated 21 May 1992 .
In that letter SAC took the point that  "Our clients have no contract and consequently there is no agreement to arbitrate with Ocean Laser..." In other words, SAC in fact (and in my view correctly) read HFW\'s telex as a call to arbitrate with Ocean Laser: they declined to do so on the mistaken ground that there was no agreement and therefore no obligation to do so .
That was how the Mr Kazantzis and Mr Newcomb and Mr Lugg themselves viewed the matter .
Their reasons for upholding their jurisdiction in the matter of Ocean Laser\'s claims do not of course bind me and have not affected my conclusion: but I find in those reasons further support for my conclusion .
In the reasons appended to their Interim Final Award dated 14 July 1998 they said: "It was a notification to the Sellers, through their solicitors, of the appointment of Mr Kazantzis as arbitrator on behalf of Ocean Laser .
As such, it was by implication a notice requiring them to appoint an arbitrator for themselves. .
I now come to HFW\'s letter of 12 November 1993 .
By that time points of claim had recently been served on behalf of both Roussos and Ocean Laser, and SAC had written to Mr Kazantzis, Mr Newcomb and HFW to repeat the denial of any obligation to arbitrate with Ocean Laser .
That led directly to HFW\'s response to the arbitrators, copied to SAC, in which they explained that Ocean Laser was the buyer "to be nominated" under the MOA .
The letter began by saying that it was dealing with SAC\'s letter "to you" (ie the arbitrators) "relating to the question of the jurisdiction to deal with any claim by Ocean Laser" .
The letter ended by saying that if SAC (or "the Tribunal") needed further clarification, they would no doubt let HFW know .
Thus the letter is written on the assumption that Mr Newcomb as well as Mr Kazantzis had already been clothed with jurisdiction in respect of Ocean Laser\'s claims and had become "the Tribunal" .
It is not clear whence they derived that assumption in the face of SAC\'s letter of 8 November .
It may be (and this is a matter that I will be considering below) that they thought that the tribunal\'s jurisdiction in the Roussos/Willie arbitration would have been enlarged by the unilateral submission to them by Ocean Laser of Ocean Laser\'s claim arising out of the same contract .
Or it may be that they were taking for granted that, unless they heard to the contrary, Willie would indeed recognise Mr Newcomb\'s jurisdiction in respect of the Ocean Laser claim .
If that was so, they were of course disabused of that assumption upon service of Willie\'s points of defence of 29 November 1993, which asserted that the tribunal had no jurisdiction over Ocean Laser\'s claim .
However, it was one thing to assert, as Willie there did, that the present tribunal had been appointed and had jurisdiction only in respect of disputes between Roussos and Willie .
It is another to submit, as Mr Nolan does, that Willie did not know, or rather that it was reasonable for them not to have understood, that they were being requested, if they had not already done so, to appoint Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator in respect of the Ocean Laser claim as well .
The latter submission seems to me to throw up in an intriguing way the question of how far the approach which I find the Court of Appeal to have taken in Nea Agrex can be stretched .
If the question is whether it had been made reasonably clear to Willie that Ocean Laser had invoked against them a submission to arbitration in respect of their claim under the MOA and its arbitration clause, and that Willie were expected to respond to that invocation by themselves submitting that claim there and then - if they had not already done so - to the arbitral process, I find it impossible to say that that question should not be answered with a plain "Yes" .
If, therefore, for any reason an arbitration had not already been commenced by Ocean Laser (I have held that it had), it would have been commenced by this letter of 12 November .
Indeed, although separate reliance was not placed on the buyers\' points of claim themselves (other than as part of the overall context), if I had been asked to do so, I would have regarded that pleading as itself initiating an arbitration .
If, as Lord Denning thought, a notice which says "I require the difference between us to be submitted to arbitration" is sufficient, then I cannot see why Ocean Laser\'s points of claim are not sufficient, - and a fortiori HFW\'s letter in further explanation of why, in effect, Ocean Laser were entitled - and it would follow Willie were bound - to arbitrate .
If, however, the question is whether there had been a notice requesting Willie to appoint their arbitrator in response to that letter, I am inclined to say that there was not .
This is because the letter seems primarily to have been written on the assumption that Mr Newcomb  is already part  of the tribunal not only for the purposes of Roussos\'s claim but also for the purposes of Ocean Laser\'s .
On that assumption, it is hard to say that the letter should or could be read, either implicitly or in substance, as a notice  to appoint  .
It is possible, I suppose, that the letter should also be read as a notice to confirm or acquiesce in Mr Newcomb\'s appointment, if there had been any doubt as his status vis a vis Ocean Laser up to that time .
In the overall context of things, that is an attractive way of looking at the matter .
But it is also possible that Ocean Laser were prepared to rest on their submission that Mr Kazantzis and Mr Newcomb already had jurisdiction: and that in fact appears to have been how the matter was treated, at any rate up to recent times .
Where therefore there is that degree of uncertainty as to the way of reading the letter, I do not think that it should be regarded as a notice  to appoint , if that is what is needed .
The matter can perhaps be tested by considering whether that letter would stand muster as a "notice...to make the appointment" under lines 143/4 of clause 15 of the MOA .
That is the notice which would permit the notifying party to ask the LMAA to appoint on the other party\'s behalf, if the latter has defaulted for two weeks in making the appointment requested .
I find it hard to say that the letter of 12 November 1993 could be relied on for that purpose .
A letter whose at any rate primary purpose is to suggest that the tribunal (Mr Newcomb as well as Mr Kazantzis) has already been properly constituted with jurisdiction over Ocean Laser\'s claim does not look like a proper candidate for a notice to make appointment within two weeks or else lose the right to do so .
I will revert to the question of this contractual notice below .
It seems to me that the reasoning of Nea Agrex is in favour of the broad and more flexible approach which would permit me to treat the letter of 12 November 1993 as the commencement of arbitration .
If a notice to appoint an arbitrator is a valid notice when the notice should have been to agree an arbitrator, and if a notice to settle or appoint is a notice to appoint, I do not see why HFW\'s letter, which can and in my judgment should at the very least be regarded as a notice to confirm or acquiesce in the constitution of the tribunal, albeit written in the mistaken assumption that the tribunal had already been appointed, and in any event on that basis as a notice to take part in an arbitration invoked by Ocean Laser, cannot be regarded as a notice to Willie for them to act in connection with the constitution of an arbitral tribunal and as sufficing to commence arbitration.\t Finally, on this issue, Mr Nolan submits that HFW\'s telex and letter cannot amount to the necessary request because they were sent to SAC, who although instructed in the Roussos arbitration, were not instructed in respect of Ocean Laser\'s claim .
Whether as a separate point or not, Mr Nolan also emphasised that the two documents were not addressed to Willie, or even to SAC, but only copied to the latter .
It may be, and I am prepared to assume, that SAC\'s instructions went no further than to defend the Roussos arbitration .
I put that only as an assumption because it seems to me that SAC did have authority to respond at any rate to the points of claim and to HFW\'s letter of 12 November 1993: thus SAC\'s letter of 8 November 1993, to which HFW\'s letter of 12 November is itself a response, refers to "our clients\' straightforward position" .
However even on that assumption, the question in my judgment is not whether SAC were agents to receive HFW\'s communications, but whether those communications were both intended for Willie and in fact brought to Willie\'s attention .
I have no doubt that those conditions were fulfilled in respect of both telex and letter .
It may be that if SAC had replied to the effect that they had no instructions in the matter of the Ocean Laser claim and were not passing the documents to their clients, then HFW would have been wise to write directly to Willie .
As it is, however, I regard this point as being without substance .
Similarly, I do not think it matters that the documents were merely copied to SAC .
In this connection it is perhaps worth observing, although Mr Nolan\'s submission was not put on this basis, that section 27(4) of the 1934 Act, section 34(4) of the 1980 Act, and section 29(3) of the 1950 Act - but not section 14 of the 1996 Act .
- all contain precise provisions as to how a notice requiring appointment "may be served" .
Such provisions, however, either precede, or in any event pay no regard to, modern means of communication such as telex or fax; and when dealing with post require a  registered  letter to a "place of abode" in England and Wales .
Similarly, they do not contemplate the sending of a notice through a broking chain, as so often occurs in practice (see The Rimon), or on solicitors (see The Sargasso [1994] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 162) .
In Nea Agrex at 954G Shaw LJ referred to these provisions for service as applying by analogy (but of course, on his view, as not being the sole means of commencing arbitration, because of the deeming provision) .
In Nea Agrex itself the notice relied on was not served on the owners but sent to "the owners\' agents" (at 945C) .
There appears to have been no reliance on such service provisions in prior cases, and there was none before me .
I mention the point in order to emphasise the difficulty of applying the provisions of the Limitation Acts, by analogy or not, too strictly .
In sum, therefore, in my judgment an arbitration had been commenced by Ocean Laser against Willie by means of HFW\'s telex of 20 May 1992, on the basis that that was implicitly or in substance a request to Willie to appoint an arbitrator, and, if not by that telex, by means of HFW\'s letter of 12 November 1993, on the slightly different ground that the letter was in substance a request to submit Ocean Laser\'s claim to arbitration, even though not a request to appoint .
In addition, it is my view, but I do not have to decide, that, because the 1980 Act does not lay down the exclusive means of commencing an arbitration, by at any rate 12 November 1993 Ocean Laser had commenced an arbitration against Willie even if the letter of that date did not constitute a notice in the terms of section 34(3) .
I say "by at any rate 12 November 1993", because at the time of the 20 May 1992 telex, Mr Kazantzis had not yet consented to his appointment:  cf   Tradax v. Volkswagenwerk at 545H .
It follows that I do not believe that there is likely to be substantial, if any, difference in effect between the English rule laid down in the Limitation Acts and Nea Agrex and on the other hand the UNCITRAL rule to be found in article 21 of the Model Law .
It also follows that I respectfully differ from the scepticism of the learned editors of MUSTILL & BOYD as to the limits of the Court\'s indulgence .
It seems to me that the problem in Surrendra Overseas was of quite a different order: there the letter referred to the future .
Once, however, an implied request is permitted, then I do not see why a notice of appointment of a claimant\'s arbitrator, plainly an invocation of arbitration and a call for the dispute in question to be submitted to arbitration, cannot amount to a sufficient notice .
In the present case, at any rate, against the background of the Roussos arbitration, I am satisfied that it is .
I have mentioned in passing that the English rule is now to be found in section 14 of the Arbitration Act 1996 .
That section does not apply to the present dispute and therefore I have heard no submissions on it .
I note that the rule in section 14 is in slightly different terms from those of the Limitation Acts .
Thus there is no reference to deeming or treating .
I would be loathe to think that the position under the 1996 Act will be different - but that must await another day .
Although the matter did not strictly arise on Willie\'s summons, the parties were interested to know whether the HFW letter of 12 November 1993 was such a notice under clause 15 of the MOA as would entitle Ocean Laser to ask the LMAA to appoint not only the third arbitrator, but also the respondent\'s arbitrator .
I have already adverted to this provision above .
The relevant part of the clause provided: "If one of the parties fails to appoint an Arbitrator...for two weeks after the other party having appointed his Arbitrator has sent the party making default notice...to make the appointment" then the LMAA could appoint .
Thus to entitle a party (the "applicant party") to apply to the LMAA for appointment of an arbitrator on behalf of the other party (the "defaulting party") the following conditions had to be met: (i)\t\tthe applicant party had to have already appointed its arbitrator; (ii)\t\tthe applicant party had to have sent the defaulting party a notice to make its appointment; (iii)\t\tthe defaulting party had to have been in default of making its appointment for two weeks thereafter .
It was common ground that the telex of 20 May 1992 could not operate as the requisite notice to appoint, since as of 20 May 1992 Mr Kazantzis had not yet consented to act as arbitrator for Ocean Laser and therefore condition (i) was not fulfilled .
What of the letter of 12 November 1993 .
By that time Mr Kazantzis had of course consented to act as Ocean Laser\'s arbitrator .
It follows from what I have said above that in my view HFW\'s letter should be regarded as a call to submit Ocean Laser\'s claim to arbitration, indeed to arbitration before a tribunal composed of Mr Kazantzis and Mr Newcomb .
However, the letter is written primarily on the assumption that Mr Newcomb had already become a member of the tribunal for Ocean Laser\'s claim, but possibly means also that, if perchance he had not been, the explanation about Ocean Laser would lead to Willie\'s confirmation of his appointment or their acquiescence in the tribunal\'s jurisdiction .
In such circumstances, as I have already indicated, I find it hard to say that there has been a "notice...to make the appointment" in the terms of the clause .
The clause assumes that an arbitration will already have been commenced at the time when the parties had tried to agree on a single arbitrator .
The notice to make an appointment has therefore a different purpose from that of commencing arbitration: it is to put the non-appointing party on notice that he will be in default, and liable to lose the chance to appoint an arbitrator of his own choice, unless he appoints within two weeks .
In this context, I think that the question of whether the letter of 12 November 1993 was a contractual notice within the meaning of the clause is a different question from the question whether the letter was sufficient to commence an arbitration, if one had not already been commenced .
Nevertheless, it is attractive, when regard is had to the similarity of language in the 1980 Act and the clause, to say that the answer should be the same in both cases .
If, therefore, it had been my view that an arbitration could only be commenced by a notice which expressly or impliedly was a notice to make the appointment of an arbitrator, I would have been reluctant to come to a different view under the rule for the commencement of arbitration on the one hand and under clause 15 on the other .
As it is, however, I have already given my reasons for thinking that the rule relating to the commencement of arbitration is a broader and more flexible rule than the direct application of the language of the Limitation Act, taken by itself, would have allowed even if the significance of the phrase "shall be treated as being commenced" had been ignored .
Had Ocean Laser done enough to enable it to be joined as a further party to the existing arbitration between Roussos and Willie .
This issue only arose in the course of argument .
Until I raised the question of whether Ocean Laser could join in the existing arbitration between Roussos and Willie, the parties had been content to view the Ocean Laser claim as arising in a wholly separate arbitration .
Mr Berry did, however, formulate an alternative submission that Ocean Laser could join the existing arbitration by a procedure which fell short of the commencement of a new arbitration and the consensual consolidation of the two .
In the light of my decision on the first issue, this second issue does not have to be decided, but seeing that it has been argued I shall give my views on it .
Mr Berry\'s submission was that for a new party to join an existing arbitration did not require the same formalities as the initiation of a fresh arbitration, but merely notice to the existing tribunal that the new party wished to intervene and submit itself to their jurisdiction .
An unspoken premise of this submission was, as it seemed to me, that the new party was entitled in its own right (as in the present case) or as standing in the shoes of an existing or previous party to the arbitration to invoke the same arbitration agreement as that which had led to the pending arbitration .
For the purpose of his submission Mr Berry relied on two authorities, The Jordan Nicolov [1990] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 11 and Baytur SA v. Finagro Holding SA [1992] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 134, in both of which the new party claiming to enter upon an existing arbitration was an assignee of the claimant in that arbitration .
In The Jordan Nicolov the assignee was a legal assignee, the claimant\'s underwriter, who had given notice of the assignment to the other party and to the arbitrators .
The arbitration had been commenced prior to the assignment .
It was only much later, however, and at an advanced stage of the arbitration, that the assignee sought to intervene in it .
The arbitrators, however, made an award in which they held in effect that the only arbitration with which they were concerned was that between the original claimant, a charterer, and the respondent, a shipowner, and that if the underwriter wished to advance the assignor\'s claim, he would have to commence a fresh arbitration - in which he would be time barred .
Mr Justice Hobhouse, however, held that the assignor was entitled to take advantage of the arbitral appointment already made by the assignor .
He held that the notices to the respondent and to the arbitrators were necessary but also sufficient conditions to enable the assignee to intervene as a new party in the existing arbitration .
He said (at 18): "The service of the notice and the intervention in the arbitration provide as effective and satisfactory a method of carrying on the proceedings as that which is provided in relation to litigation by O.15, r.7(2) of the Rules of the Supreme Court. .
He continued (at 19): "As regards the subsequent costs of the arbitration, the intervention of the assignee clearly is a submission to the jurisdiction of the arbitrators and therefore, in addition to confirming the capacity of the arbitrators to make an award in favour of or against the assignee on the substantive claim, includes the acceptance that the arbitrators shall have in relation to the assignee the discretion to award costs conferred by s.18 of the Arbitration Act 1950 .
This is not to say that there has been some novation. .
A little later he said (also at 19): "I consider that there is no authority which precludes me from holding that the assignee is entitled to enforce the assignor\'s rights in the pending arbitration or which shows that the arbitrators do not have a jurisdiction and the duty, if the assignee is otherwise entitled to succeed on the merits, to make an award in favour of the assignee .
In my judgment, the application of principle to this factual situation demonstrates that, absent some special factor (and none is alleged in this case), the assignee is entitled to an award from the shipowners if he, the assignee, can prove his case on the merits including his case on title to sue .
His claim is not time barred .
He is entitled under the Law of Property Act to exercise all the legal remedies of the assignor .
The remedy by way of arbitration having been invoked by the assignor in time, the assignee can enforce that remedy .
It is the same remedy not a new or different remedy. .
In Baytur v. Finagro the assignee was an equitable assignee who by reason of a company reorganisation had succeeded under foreign law to the rights and obligations of a claimant in a pending arbitration at the same time as that claimant had ceased to exist .
However, there had been no notice to respondent or arbitrators of these changes and no attempt by the assignee to intervene in the arbitration .
In due course the arbitrators rendered an award in favour of the (by now defunct) claimant .
The respondent succeeded in getting that award set aside as a nullity, since the arbitration had lapsed on the demise of the claimant company .
It was argued on behalf of the assignee that it had automatically become a party to the arbitration at the moment of the assignment, so that the proceedings never lapsed: but the Court of Appeal rejected that submission .
It regarded the giving of notice and intervention in the arbitration as necessary ingredients to enable a new party to join an existing arbitration (at 151) .
Lloyd LJ added a "note of warning" ( ibid ): "It was assumed by Mr Justice Hobhouse, correctly, that the assignor would remain liable for costs already incurred in the arbitration, and that the effect of the assignment, therefore, was only to add an additional party potentially liable for those costs .
Not surprisingly he held that there were no practical difficulties on the facts of that case .
But in the present case, the assignor has ceased to exist .
So if the plaintiff sellers had been successful, they would have had to look to the defendants alone for their costs .
Nor is it clear to me what would have happened if the plaintiffs had had a counterclaim in the arbitration...There would be scope for great injustice if an insolvent assignor could assign away the benefit of a claim in arbitration to an associated company, while remaining solely liable for the burden of the respondent\'s counterclaim .
This had led me to question whether  mere  submission is enough .
Because of the nature of arbitration, as a consensual method of settling disputes, it may that the consent of the arbitrator, and the other party to the arbitration, is required .
If this is the correct analysis, then the only exception might be where the foreign law creates a universal successor, as in  National Bank of Greece v. Metliss , [1958] A.C. 509 .
But that argument was not fully developed before us, and must therefore await another occasion. .
To be compared and contrasted with those two cases is The Felicie [1990] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 21 where Mr Justice Phillips had not only held that even a statutory assignee under the Third Parties (Rights Against Insurers) Act 1930 had not automatically become substituted in a pending arbitration at the time of the assignment and in the absence of notice ("some procedural mechanism is required to substitute one party for another", at 26), but had also gone on in his reasoning to emphasise practical difficulties in the way of such substitution (at 26/27) .
It is not clear to me to what extent such reasoning may be said to have survived the decision in The Jordan Nicolov and the latter\'s apparent approval in Baytur v. Finagro, or to depend on the particular nature of the operation of the 1930 Act .
The present case is not one of assignment, but of novation (see Damon Compania Naviera SA v. Hapag-Lloyd International SA (The Blankenstein) [1985] 1 WLR 435 .
Therefore there is no question of substituting one party for another in the arbitration, Ocean Laser for Roussos, but of adding an additional party .
In the circumstances, I see no difficulties in terms of costs, for each party could be made liable in costs as seemed appropriate to the arbitrators in their discretion .
Nor is there any problem, as can exist in the case of assignment, of some stranger to the underlying contract intruding on a unilateral basis into the contracting parties\' arbitration, for Ocean Laser is a contracting party .
For the same reason, there is no problem in the event of any counterclaims against either claimant: whereas an assignee usually is not subject to any burden .
It is true that the claim of Roussos may be different from that of Ocean Laser (even though Roussos also claimed to be entitled to assert Ocean Laser\'s claim on their behalf), and that by reason of the novation it is possible that Roussos\'s claim would be bound to fail even where Ocean Laser\'s claim might be entitled to succeed .
Thus Ocean Laser\'s remedy may well not be the same as Roussos\'s remedy .
That is, on Mr Justice Hobhouse\'s reasoning, a real difference from the case of assignment .
But in the case of a legal assignment, the effect of it is to destroy the assignor\'s right or remedy by virtue of recreating it in the hands of the assignee .
That seems to me to be not unlike the sort of novation which takes place in a Blankenstein situation .
I would be loathe to think that where a claim by party A to a contract with party B has been submitted to arbitration under that contract\'s arbitration clause, another claim based on identical facts brought by a third party to the same contract, party C, could not (without the agreement of B) be referred to the same arbitration but would have to be referred under an entirely new arbitral submission .
No authority has been cited to me which compels me to determine that that would have to be done .
I know of course that arbitration is a consensual process: but where the relevant parties are bound to arbitrate, I do not see why the respondent\'s refusal to recognise party C\'s submission of his claim to the same arbitrators can force parties A and C to arbitrate in separate arbitrations .
It would mean that where an arbitration had been commenced in error by one only of two or more joint contractors, then the absent party could not (without the respondent\'s agreement, which there would be no incentive to give) join the same arbitration, even though his absence might be crucial to the success of a joint contractors\' claim .
It would mean that where it was uncertain which of two contracting parties held a claim, they could not (without the respondent\'s agreement) claim as alternative claimants in the same arbitration once an arbitration had been commenced by one only of them .
The vice of that (apart from waste of time and resources) is the danger of inconsistent decisions in separate arbitrations, for at the respondent\'s option a different tribunal could be enforced in the second arbitration .
I can see that the position is different where the claimants cannot agree between themselves on a single arbitrator or single arbitration; and I recognise that each arbitration agreement can spawn several arbitrations (see MUSTILL & BOYD at 505/6) .
Such considerations do not, however, to my mind necessitate separate arbitrations in a case like the present .
In Baytur v. Finagro at 151 Lloyd LJ raised the question, in the context of an assignment, whether in the absence of his consent, a respondent could be forced to accept an assignee\'s intervention, where the assignor had divested his assets so as to render the respondent\'s counterclaim nugatory .
That, it seems to me, is a problem not confined to arbitration .
In any event, it does not arise in a case like the present .
It does seem to me, however, that the intervening party must at least obtain the consent of the existing claimant\'s arbitrator to act in respect of his own claim as well .
As for late interventions, it seems to me that arbitrators are perfectly able to recognise "new claims" which properly fall foul of limitation considerations .
If my decision in this case had had to depend on this issue, I would have been prepared therefore to hold that Ocean Laser had properly joined the Roussos/Willie arbitration by obtaining Mr Kazantzis\'s consent to act as their arbitrator and by giving notice to Willie and the arbitrators of their claim and of their submission to the tribunal already in place in the pending arbitration .
As it is, however, I have already decided that Ocean Laser had commenced arbitration against Willie in 1992, and Mr Nolan was able to inform me, upon instructions, that if I so decided Willie would confirm Mr Newcomb as their arbitrator .
The danger of a separate tribunal and separate hearings, which at one time had been threatened, has therefore evaporated .
In the circumstances, and because this second issue was argued by counsel at what was in effect short notice, I think it would be better to say that the matters expressed in this part of my judgment reflect my opinion rather than my decision .
Were the arbitrators entitled to change their minds about the amendment of the buyers\' pleadings .
It was common ground that this was for present purposes a question of jurisdiction .
If the arbitrators had jurisdiction to revisit their decision allowing the amendment, then any allegation of misconduct or procedural mishap would have to await the outcome of the arbitration, for there is no general power in the courts to supervise the conduct of an arbitration prior to award: see Bremer Vulkan Schiffbau und Maschinenfabrik v. South India Shipping Corporation [1981] AC 909 .
As Mr Justice Steyn put it trenchantly in K/S A/S Bill Biakh v. Hyundai Corporation [1988] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 187 at 189: "In an extreme case it is conceivable that an arbitrator\'s failure to observe the principles of natural justice in the making of interlocutory rulings may lead either to the revocation of the mandate of the arbitrators under s.23(2), but it follows from the decision in  Bremer Vulcan   Schiffbrau und Machinenfabrik v. South India Shipping Corpn .
Ltd.  [1981] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep. 253; [1981] A.C. 909 that the Court has no inherent jurisdiction to correct procedural errors, even if they can be categorised as misconduct, during the course of the reference, and that the statutory scheme of the Arbitration Acts does not authorize such corrective measures .
The remedies are therefore revocation of the authority of the arbitrator in the exceptional cases where that might be appropriate, or resisting enforcement of the award .
"This is not a lacuna in our law .
In the interests of expedition and finality of arbitration proceedings, it is of the first importance that judicial intrusion in the arbitral process should be kept to a minimum .
A judicial power to correct during the course of the reference procedural rulings of an arbitrator which are within his jurisdiction is unknown in advanced arbitration systems, as is clear from the valuable Year Books published by the International Council of Commercial Arbitration, and the creation of such a power by judicial precedent in this case would constitute a most serious reproach to the ability of our system of arbitration to serve the needs of users of the arbitral process. .
It therefore fell to Mr Berry to submit that the arbitrators lacked jurisdiction to change their minds so as to refuse leave to plead paragraph 4A of the amended points of claim .
He sought to make good that submission in the following ways .
First, he said that the decision to allow the amendment created an issue estoppel, with the effect that the arbitrators were  pro tanto  discharged from their office, were to that extent  functi officio  .
For this purpose he relied on Fidelitas Shipping Company Ltd v. V/O Exportchleb [1966] 1 QB 630 .
Secondly, he said that the decision, recorded in Mr Kazantzis\'s letter of 21 May 1998, was itself an "award", that there was no reason why there could not be an award on interlocutory matters or matters of procedure, and that whether or not the decision created an issue estoppel, the issue of an award rendered a tribunal  functus officio  as to the matters determined in that award .
In this connection he relied primarily on Cargill Srl Milan v. P Kadinopoulos SA [1992] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 1 .
Thirdly, he invoked the analogy of litigation and pointed out that whereas there might be jurisdiction in a court to change its mind up to the time when its order is perfected, once that has happened, the court lacked jurisdiction to alter its order and the matter could only be revisited if at all on appeal: see the notes to the Supreme Court Practice, Vol 1, 1999, at 20/11/1 and 20/11/7-9  passim  .
Fourthly, he appealed to considerations of policy, submitting that a rule that would permit arbitrators to change their minds in the course of a reference would encourage parties to revisit a point time and time again, with serious consequences in terms of loss of time and waste of costs and the danger of injustice .
Mr Nolan on the other hand submitted that arbitrators were masters of their own procedure; that the doctrine of issue estoppel or of  functus officio  did not apply to matters of procedure but only to a final decision on the merits (see The Sennar (No 2) [1985] 1 WLR 490 at 499); that the analogy of litigation did not apply in arbitration in the absence of any possibility of appeal on interlocutory matters, and that in any event matters of procedure could be reopened in litigation without appeal; and that as to matters of policy, arbitrators could look after themselves to ensure that they were not constantly badgered to change their minds .
I shall consider these submissions in turn, beginning with Mr Berry\'s reliance on the doctrine of issue estoppel .
His foundation here was the Fidelitas case and in particular the judgment of Diplock LJ at 641/4, where he said: "Arbitration, like litigation, is concerned only with the legal rights and duties of the parties thereto .
It is concerned with facts only in so far as they give rise to legal consequences .
The final resolution of disputes between parties as to their respective legal rights or duties may involve the determination of a number of different "issues", that is to say, a number of decisions as to the legal consequences of particular facts, each of which decisions constitutes a necessary step in determining what are the legal rights and duties of the parties resulting from the totality of the facts... "Issue estoppel applies to arbitration as it does to litigation .
The parties having chosen the tribunal to determine the disputes between them as to their legal rights and duties are bound by the determination by that tribunal of any issue which is relevant to the decision of any dispute referred to that tribunal .
An arbitrator to-day has power to make an interim award determining particular issues separately from other issues in the arbitration .
It is, I understand, conceded by Mr. Goff, on behalf of the owners, that if the arbitrator does so, his interim award creates an issue estoppel as respects the issue determined by the interim award... "Once his final award is made, whether or not stated in the form of a special case, the arbitrator himself becomes  functus officio  as respects all the issues between the parties unless his jurisdiction is revived by the Court\'s exercise of its power to remit the award to him for his reconsideration .
But this is merely the way in which the principle  nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa  affects the arbitrator\'s functions .
He has decided the questions of fact as to which he is the exclusive tribunal;; he has determined their legal consequences subject only to correction by the High Court on the stated questions of law .
The parties cannot re-open the same matters again before him .
Where his award is an interim award stated in the form of a special case, it determines the particular issue or issues to which it relates in alternative ways dependent upon the answer of the High Court to the question of law stated in the special case .
It creates an issue estoppel or issue estoppels between the parties and the arbitrator is  functus officio  as respects the issues to which his interim award relates. .
In my judgment, however, there is nothing in these passages to suggest that the doctrine of issue estoppel can apply to mere questions of procedure, as distinct from issues on the final merits .
On the contrary, the whole context in which these remarks occurred was concerned with plainly substantive matters such as issues of cesser of liability and waiver .
That Diplock LJ was speaking with that context in mind is in my view well exemplified by the opening sentences of the passage cited above, where Diplock LJ speaks of "The final resolution of a dispute", or in the closing passage cited above where he refers to an arbitrator\'s "final award" or to an "interim award" which is determinative of certain issues .
Thus Lord Denning MR (with whose judgment Dankwerts LJ agreed) put the matter in this way (at 640B/C): "...if one party brings an action against another for a particular cause and judgment is given upon it, there is a strict rule of law that he cannot bring another action against the same party for the same cause...But within one cause of action there may be several issues raised which are necessary for the determination of the whole case..." The Sennar (No 2) in my view demonstrates the same philosophy in a case where admittedly the distinction between a final determination of an issue on the merits and a merely procedural decision was less easy to determine .
This was because that case was concerned with the interlocutory question of whether an English admiralty action should be stayed on the basis that the parties had agreed in their bill of lading contract to submit themselves to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts in Sudan under Sudanese law .
There had been a previous attempt at arrest of the defendant shipowners\' vessel in Holland, but the Dutch courts had already declined jurisdiction on the grounds of the applicability of the bill of lading jurisdiction clause .
The House of Lords held that that decision of the Dutch courts raised an issue estoppel in the English action, preventing the plaintiffs from revisiting the question of whether the jurisdiction clause applied to their claim (the Admiralty judge at first instance had held that it did not) and effectively determining the need for a stay .
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook said (at 499E/G): "The argument in relation to the first contention was that the judgment of the Dutch Court of Appeal was procedural in nature, in that it consisted only of a decision that a Dutch court had no jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the appellants\' claim, and did not pronounce in any way on the question whether the claim itself, or any substantive issue in it, if it were to be entertained and adjudicated on, would succeed or fail .
In my opinion, this argument is based on a misconception with regard to the meaning of the expression "on the merits" as used in the context of the doctrine of issue estoppel .
Looking at the matter negatively a decision on procedure alone is not a decision on the merits .
Looking at the matter positively a decision on the merits is a decision which establishes certain facts as proved or not in dispute; states what are the relevant principles of law applicable to such facts; and expresses a conclusion with regard to the effect of applying those principles to the factual situation concerned .
If the expression "on the merits" is interpreted in this way, as I am clearly of the opinion that it should be, there can be no doubt whatever that the decision of the Dutch Court of Appeal in the present was a decision on the merits for the purposes of the application of the doctrine of issue estoppel .
In my view, therefore, the argument for the appellants on this point is misconceived and should be rejected. .
Mr Nolan emphasised the dictum embraced in that paragraph that "a decision on procedure alone is not a decision on the merits" .
In the same vein, in relation to the matter of discretion, he relied on the judgment of Wills J (with which Kennedy J agreed) in Smith v. Shann [1898] 2 QB 347 which concerned the discretion of justices to grant or refuse a licence to sell beer .
An objection, having failed one year and being renewed on the same facts the following year, was on the latter occasion upheld .
It was suggested to the Divisional Court that there was an estoppel, but Wills J said (at 350): "What was done by the justices when the transfer was applied for was in no sense a decision, or a judgment of the Court, upon which an estoppel could be founded; to hold otherwise would involve an enormous extension of the doctrine of estoppel .
The statute...does not say that they are to refuse the application, if one of the grounds of objection is made out; to have said so would have been to take away their discretion altogether. .
In my judgment, the decision to allow the buyers\' amendment was not a decision on the merits, but was a matter of pure procedure, involving no more than issues of discretion .
In such circumstances, I cannot see how there can be any question of an issue estoppel .
It follows that Mr Berry\'s submission that the tribunal was  functus officio  on the ground of there being an issue estoppel must fail .
There was no submission before me that the decision involved the determination of any questions of limitation, and therefore I am not to be taken to be deciding that the determination of such questions could not lead to an issue estoppel .
I have heard no argument on that .
Mr Berry\'s next submission was that the arbitrators\' decision was an award, and that they were  functi officio  on that ground to the extent of that award .
There is no statutory or common law definition of what constitutes an "award" .
The matter was considered in Cargill v. Kadinopoulos [1992] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 1 .
The arbitration in that case was governed by a sophisticated code known as the GAFTA Arbitration Rules .
Those Rules provided for a two tier arbitration procedure with a right of appeal to a Board of Appeal from any "award" of the first tier arbitrator .
The Rules also contained detailed limitation provisions together with an overriding discretion in the first tier arbitrator to allow a claim to proceed despite its lateness .
A first tier arbitrator found that Kadinopoulos\'s claim was time-barred and refused in his discretion to allow it to proceed .
It followed that the claim, in the words of the Rules, was "deemed to have been withdrawn and abandoned" .
The arbitrator wrote up his decision in the form of an "interim award" .
The House of Lords had to say whether that was an award properly so-called in terms of the Rules so as to permit appeal to the Board of Appeal, which had reversed the arbitrator\'s decision .
Lord Goff of Chieveley, with whose speech the other members of the House agreed, pointed out that the arbitrator\'s decision had involved both findings of fact, as to whether circumstances had arisen as to whether he was called upon to exercise his discretion, and a decision as to how he should exercise that discretion .
Lord Goff then continued (at 4/5): "Like the Judge and the Court of Appeal, I am of the opinion that this decision was properly made the subject of an award .
It is enough for me to say (subject to any right of appeal) it conclusively determined that the arbitration was at an end and so finally disposed of the relevant matters which had been submitted to arbitration; such a determination is properly the subject matter of an award, carrying with it the usual consequences which flow from an award - in particular, it renders the arbitrator functus officio and prevents the unsuccessful claimant from rearbitrating or litigating the identical claim in the future (see generally  Mustill and Boyd on Commercial Arbitration , 2nd ed., pp 404-405 and 409-413, and cases there cited) .
It is, in my opinion, unnecessary in the present case to attempt an exhaustive definition of the precise nature of an arbitration award, because I am in no doubt that in the present case the arbitrator\'s decision was properly made the subject matter of an award .
Indeed, as Lord Justice Leggatt pointed out in the Court of Appeal, it would be unrealistic to hold otherwise .
"It was suggested by the buyers that, in the arbitration rules, the expression "award" was, as a matter of construction, to be confined to decisions on jurisdiction or on the merits of a dispute .
This would in the present context impose an artificial limit upon the meaning of the word "award", which I would be unwilling to accept without good reason .
As it is, there is certainly no express provision to this effect, and I cannot discover an acceptable basis for an implication displacing the ordinary understanding of what is meant by an award .
In the present case the determination of the arbitrator, although it did not amount to a decision of the merits of the sellers\' claim, nevertheless did finally dispose of the relevant matters in dispute because it finally determined that the sellers\' claim was deemed to have been withdrawn and abandoned and so could no longer be pursued against the buyers .
Such a determination is, in my opinion, properly made the subject matter of an award .
In reaching this conclusion, I draw comfort from the fact that the new s.13A of the Arbitration Act, 1950 will, when brought into force, confer upon an arbitrator or umpire the power to make an award dismissing the claim for what, in the context of litigation, is called want of prosecution (see s. 102 of the Courts and Legal Services Act, 1990). .
[3] The question of what constitutes an award was also briefly visited, by coincidence on the very same day as Cargill v. Kadinopoulos was before the House of Lords, by Judge Diamond QC in The Trade Fortitude [1992] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep 169 .
There by an "interim final award" a majority of arbitrators had expressed their decision  not  to make an interim award for undisputed demurrage pending the hearing of cross-claims .
Webster J had given leave to appeal to the shipowners pursuant to section 1(3)(b) of the Arbitration Act 1979 .
Judge Diamond expressed concern and hesitation about recognising the arbitrators\' decision as an award properly so called, and thus permitting procedural decisions to be appealed to the court under the Act .
He regarded it as of great importance that judicial intrusion into the arbitration process be kept to a minimum and cited the passage from Mr Justice Steyn\'s judgment in K/S A/S Bill Biakh v. Hyundai Corporation to which I have already referred .
He continued (at 175): "In the present case, however, the arbitrators have themselves embodied their decision in a document which they describe as an "Interim Final Award" and they have given detailed reasons with a view, presumably, to the possibility of an appeal under the 1979 Act .
Had they not done so I would have declined to review the arbitrators\' decision on the ground that they had not issued an award within s.14 of the 1950 Act and on the further ground that they had made a purely procedural decision in the course of a current reference .
Since, however, the arbitrators themselves issued a document entitled "Interim Final Award" and since I find it impossible to say that this document, being a decision in respect of matters referred to the arbitrators for decision, is incapable by reason of its procedural nature of constituting an award within s.14 of the Act (see for a discussion of the nature of an interim award  Fidelitas Shipping Company Ltd. v. V/O Exportchleb , [1965] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep. 223 at p.228, and  The Kostas Melas , [1981] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep. 18, at pp.25-26) I have, albeit with considerable reluctance, been compelled to accept that the Court does have jurisdiction in the present case to review the arbitrators\' decision. .
[4] Mr Berry also relied on The Vasso [1983] 2 Lloyd\'s Rep 346, where with the arbitrator\'s consent and against the background of his reasoned decision a party applied under section 2 of the Arbitration Act 1979 for the court\'s determination of three "preliminary point[s] of law" as to the extent of the arbitrator\'s powers under section 12(1) of the Arbitration Act 1950 and in particular whether he could (and should) make an order for inspection of a vessel .
Mr Justice Lloyd declined to answer the question whether the order  should  have been made, since that was a matter of pure discretion and not one of law at all .
He entertained the other two questions, however, even though he rather doubted the court\'s jurisdiction to accept the application under section 2 of the 1979 Act on the grounds that his decision either way could not "produce substantial savings in costs to the parties" and that the questions of law could not have arisen in connection with an appeal from a final award under section 1(3)(b) of the 1979 Act (see the conditions for hearing such an application to determine a preliminary point of law in section 2(2)(a) and (b)) .
He did, nevertheless, go on to consider and answer the other two questions because he was, it seems, prepared to treat the arbitrator\'s reasoned decision as an "interim award" in respect of which he had power to give leave to appeal on questions of law, and he regarded the surviving questions of law as interesting and important .
He said (at 348): "Although the parties, and the arbitrator, have approached this application as being made under s.2 of the 1979 Act, it may be that they should have regarded the arbitrator\'s order for inspection as an interim award..."  It may be noted that in the Arbitration Act 1996 (which does not govern the present arbitration) the expression "interim award" has been avoided: section 47 says that unless otherwise agreed the tribunal may make "more than one award" on different aspects of the matters to be determined; sections 20/22 refer to "decisions, orders and awards" and section 34 refers to the tribunal\'s power to "decide all procedural and evidential matters" and to its "directions" in that context .
Under the new Act, therefore, there appears to be a desire to contrast awards (at any stage of the arbitral proceedings) with other forms of decisions, orders and directions which arbitrators may make .
It has of course to be appreciated that interlocutory, procedural or discretionary decisions may be of many different kinds .
There is the sort of decision which is finally determinative of a claim (or part of a claim), such as decisions to the effect that a claim is barred, or that a claim should be struck out .
There is the sort of decision which can never be a formal bar to the revisiting of a question, because it depends on changing circumstances, such as, par excellence, timing decisions regarding the conduct of a reference, or decisions not to permit amendment or discovery: in theory circumstances can change so materially as to make it proper not only to revisit the question, but for a tribunal to alter its decision .
And there are decisions which may be entirely a matter of discretion, but which would prima facie appear to be final, such as a decision to allow an amendment to be made .
I am doubtful that a single rule could appropriately deal with every type of such decisions .
I would, however, attempt to formulate the present state of the authorities as follows: (i) A decision which finally determines a claim, by holding it to be barred or struck out, can properly be made the subject matter of an award .
If the decision disposes of everything within the reference, it could be made the subject of a final award, but if it disposes of only part of the reference, it would be made the subject of an interim award .
See Cargill v. Kadinopoulos .
(ii) It may be that arbitrators always have a discretion to render a decision, whatever its nature, in the form of an interim award .
That would be a matter for them .
By stating their decision in the form of a reasoned award, they might be indicating, not that the subject matter was properly matter for appeal, for that would depend on the Nema principles, but at any rate that subject to those principles an application for leave to appeal could at least be made .
They would also be indicating, in my view, that to the extent of their decision they regarded themselves as  functi officio  .
Since there would be an opportunity at any rate to seek leave to appeal, the analogy with the rule in litigation that perfection of an order removes jurisdiction  pro tanto  from the judge and transfers it to the appellate court would seem to have some force .
None of this is intended to encourage arbitrators to state procedural decisions in the form of an interim award, but it could be that a procedural or evidential decision raises a question of such principle or importance that an interim award would be appropriate .
(iii) Subject to (i) and (ii), however, I am generally sceptical that interlocutory, procedural or discretionary decisions can properly be treated as though they are the subject matter of an interim award .
It does not seem to me that Cargill v Kadinopoulos goes that far .
In any event, I cannot imagine that arbitrators or the courts would contemplate that interim awards on such interlocutory matters should, save in the exceptional case, be made the means by which the courts could supervise the conduct of a reference:  cf  Bremer Vulkan and Bill Biakh .
It follows that since Mr Kazantzis\'s letter is neither a decision on the merits, nor finally dispositive of any issue referred, nor expressed by the arbitrators to be an interim award, there is no basis in terms of Mr Berry\'s second submission to hold that the arbitrators lack jurisdiction to revisit their decision .
Mr Berry\'s third submission was to invoke the analogy of litigation and the rule that a perfected order cannot be changed otherwise than on appeal (or subject to the narrow confines of the "slip" rule) .
This is not the place for any detailed study of the operation of this doctrine in litigation .
Suffice it to say that I do not see force in the submission that the analogy should be applied in arbitration .
In general there is no appeal within the arbitral process itself, save in the case of certain detailed arbitral codes, such as GAFTA\'s, which provide for two tier arbitrations .
It may be that in that context the position could be different, but that would be very much a question of the construction of the applicable rules .
Nor is there in general a process of appeal out of arbitration and into the courts (subject to the right to appeal an "award" as discussed above) .
On the contrary the general rule is that there is no inherent supervisory jurisdiction in the courts over the conduct of a reference .
That suggests that there should not be the same jurisdictional strictness in matters of procedural decision-making within the arbitral process as there is in litigation with its hierarchy of courts .
Moreover, there always remains the opportunity, once the reference is over, for an aggrieved party to complain that there has been misconduct or at any rate a "procedural mishap" which has rendered the proceedings unfair .
Finally, there is the matter of policy .
I can see that it would be undesirable for arbitrators to be under constant pressure to revisit or amend their decisions on the basis that they had jurisdiction to do so and that the courts could not intervene .
Nevertheless, I am confident that arbitrators can look after themselves and know how to resist pressure of that sort .
It will or may arise in any event in circumstances where procedural decisions must respond to changing circumstances .
The problem in this case did not arise from pressure from Willie, but from the arbitrators\' own further thoughts on the subject .
If arbitrators are clear in their own minds that they have erred, it is no bad thing that they should have the courage to say so .
If they have exceeded their jurisdiction in procedural matters, as was alleged in The Vasso, I do not doubt that the issue of law can be brought before the court in any event .
For the rest, any question of misconduct can be raised after the reference is over .
For these reasons, I decline to declare that the arbitrators lacked jurisdiction to revisit and reverse their earlier decision regarding the amendment .
Note 1\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  I do not know how much thought went into this expression .
I can see that the expression "buyers" may have been ambiguous .
The intent, I suppose, was to refer to Roussos .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 2\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 This is not strictly correct .
Section 29(2) of the Arbitration Act 1950 (the "1950 Act") used to contain a special provision for the commencement of an arbitration for the purposes of section 496 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1894 .
Section 29(1) of the 1950 Act extended the expression "legal proceedings" under section 496 to arbitration, and section 29(2) then provided:\r\n\t"For the purposes of the said section four hundred and ninety-six, as amended by this section, an arbitration shall be deemed to be commenced when one party to the arbitration agreement serves on the other party or parties a notice requiring him or them to appoint or concur in appointing an arbitrator..."  \r\nUnder the Merchant Shipping Act 1995, however, section 29(1) of the 1950 Act was repealed and section 29(2) was amended by deleting the words at the beginning of that sub-section preceding "an arbitration" .
Thus section 29(2) became, at the end of the life of the 1950 Act, a general provision for the commencement of arbitration .
Such a general provision (albeit in different language) now appears in section 14 of the 1996 Act .
Of course, at the time in question in the present case, be it 1992 or 1993, neither section 29(2) of the 1950 Act nor the 1996 Act applied .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 3\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02  It seems to me that this passage from Lord Goff\'s speech in Cargill v. Kadinopoulos may support the view that I had tentatively expressed in James Lazenby & Co v. McNicholas Construction Co Ltd [1995] 1 WLR 615 at 630/1 to the effect that an award striking out a claim for want of prosecution under section 13A of the Arbitration Act 1950 would be a final determination of the claim .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back] Note 4\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\x02 For my part I find nothing in the discussions of interim awards in Fidelitas or The Kostas Melas  (mentioned by Judge Diamond) to encourage the idea that purely procedural decisions can properly be made the subject-matter of such awards, in the absence at any rate of contrary agreement in the rules which govern the parties\' arbitration .
\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0\xc2\xa0 [Back]  .
b'Introduction and facts In this action the plaintiff, Huyton S.A. ("Huyton"), seeks declaratory and injunctive relief to prevent the defendant, Peter Cremer GmbH & Co. ("Cremer"), from pursuing a claim which Cremer has referred to London arbitration by GAFTA .
The claim which Cremer wishes to arbitrate seeks to establish that demurrage under a sale contract entered into with Huyton should have been measured at a rate of $6,500 per day, rather than the $11,000 which Huyton insisted upon Cremer paying; to establish further that it was not liable for all or at any rate the larger part ($49,000) of the sum of $65,245.40 likewise paid at Huyton\'s insistence, on account of guarantee expenses; and to recover sums accordingly .
The factual background starts with the sale contract dated 13th September 1995 for the shipment and sale by Cremer as seller to Huyton as buyer of 30,000 mt Romanian milling wheat plus or minus 10% at buyer\'s option at $175 per mt FOB spout trimmed Constantza in September/October 1995 .
The contract provided for payment cash against listed documents .
Shipped weight, quality, condition, description, sampling and analysis were to be final as certified on loading by SGS .
Loading was to take place at 2000 mt per weather working day (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded), with "demurrage max .
11.000 .
US$ as per C/P..." .
The charter was otherwise subject generally to GAFTA form 64, which by clause 29 includes provision for GAFTA arbitration in London of "any dispute arising out of or under this contract" .
Cremer is based in Hamburg .
It had previously contracted to buy equivalent wheat from Romanian suppliers .
Huyton is a Swiss company, owned I was told by Sudanese interests, but represented for most purposes by a London company, Agrimpex Co. Ltd. Huyton also had a pre-existing commitment, made 31st August 1994, to sell to Sotisco Trading Company Limited ("Sotisco") of Khartoum "any origin milling wheat in sound good condition, crop 1993/1994 or 1994/1995 at sellers option at $225 per mt C+FFO Port Sudan" .
Payment under Huyton\'s contract with Sotisco was by irrevocable letter of credit, which was opened through the Omdurman National Bank .
Quality, condition, description and sampling were to be final as certified on loading by an independent surveyor .
Sotisco acts, it appears, simply as importer, onselling in this case to Sidco, a buying federation or cooperative established by Sudanese millers .
Agrimpex on behalf of Huyton instructed its regular brokers, J. Gran & Partners Ltd. ("JGP") of London, to charter a vessel to lift the wheat contracted to be shipped by Cremer .
The principal of JGP is Mr Jens Gran, and his assistant at the time was Mr Frank Lund .
In order to try to ensure that it obtained the most favourable conditions, Agrimpex\'s policy was, to JGP\'s knowledge, to charter vessels from their owners or time charterers, rather than on back to back terms from other voyage charterers .
On 22nd September 1995 Mr Lund recapitulated to Agrimpex a voyage charter for the "Ithomi" said to have been made with Norwegian Bulk Transport Ltd ("NBT"), under which the freight was $550,000 (increased in a side letter to $650,000) while the demurrage rate was $11,000 per day .
The charter included a term whereby owners undertook to release the cargo to receivers at the discharge port against an indemnity if original bills of lading were not available, and identified JGP as "shipbroker" .
On the same day, NBT chartered in the Ithomi from Olympic Chartering S.A. ("Olympic") under a voyage charter on like terms, providing for freight of $620,000 but demurrage of only $6,500 per day .
A week later, the Ithomi was substituted in these arrangements by the Mike K, to which Olympic were also disponent owners .
Olympic were it appears time charterers of the Mike K from her owners, Del Scando Shipping Co. Ltd. under time charter dated 22nd September 1995 .
It transpires that NBT was owned by Jens ran until February 1995, when it was sold to Mr Gunnar Gran, a nephew of Mr Jens Gran, who until the end of 1995 worked for Messrs. Grieg, shipbrokers of Bergen .
Jens Gran continued to retain limited authority to deal with NBT\'s business after February 1995 .
These facts regarding NBT were unknown at any relevant time to Huyton as well as Cremer .
On the evidence of their own witness statements, neither Mr Lund nor Mr Gunnar Gran appears to have had an active conception of a broker\'s duties of good faith and integrity .
Mr Lund allowed himself and JGP to become involved in acting as brokers for NBT on the head charter from Olympic .
He seems to have regarded JGP as owing duties to NBT in relation to the charter to Huyton .
He realised that the back to back charter being set up by Gunnar Gran was contrary to Huyton\'s policy, but he kept silent "to protect the interests of my employer" and, as he put it, to be "as neutral as possible" between two principles for whom he should, in reality, never have been acted at one and the same time in the first place .
Mr Gunnar Gran positively instructed Mr Lund to mislead Agrimpex, e.g .
by telling him not to mention to Agrimpex that NBT was taking the ship on voyage charter from Olympic (which he also knew to be contrary to Huyton\'s policy) and, so, not to mention anything about the head charter demurrage rate, as well as by telling him to say that the sub-charter demurrage rate of $11,000 could not be reduced .
Accordingly, when Mr Amaslidis of Agrimpex on or about 20th September 1995 asked Mr Lund specifically to seek a lower demurrage rate, Mr Lund reverted to the effect that he was unable to persuade owners to come down .
JGP and NBT thus co-operated to mislead Huyton and to act against Huyton\'s instructions and interests, so that NBT could profit at the expense of Huyton or whoever ultimately bore the demurrage .
The upshot of their misconduct was that the charter arrangements were structured to that NBT would make a relatively modest profit of $30,000 out of the freight differential plus, much more significantly, a profit of $3,500 per day on the substantial demurrage which, it was correctly envisaged, would be earned at the load port in Romania .
The Mike K arrived at Constantza on 29th September 1995, giving notice of readiness at 2300 hours .
Loading commenced on 31st October and was completed on 14th December 1995 .
In respect of the shipment and carriage of the cargo, the master of the Mike K signed and issued to Cremer as shipper a bill of lading dated 14th December 1995, showing the consignee as being "to order" and Sotisco as notify party .
Already prior to completion of loading, a protest by Agrimpex at the delay had led at the end of November and beginning of December 1995 to both sides nominating an arbitrator to act in any eventual arbitration .
At a demurrage rate of $11,000 a day, and allowing for holidays and other interruptions of time, Cremer\'s liability for load port demurrage amounted to $496,840.97, as set out in a calculation which was sent by Huyton to Cremer on about 18th December 1995 together with a copy of the charter between NBT and Huyton .
However, before receiving this calculation, Cremer had on 15th December 1995 prepared its own preliminary calculation, which did not take full account of interruptions and arrived at demurrage of $533,507.64 .
It was this calculation which, somewhat curiously, was sent by Cremer to its Romanian seller on 8th January 1998 and it is the sum in it which was deducted by Cremer from the amount it paid at or about that time to its Romanian seller .
Cremer has never refunded the extra $36,666.67 to its Romanian seller or informed it of the discrepancy or, indeed, about the present claim against Huyton - the explanation which Mr Birkholz gave me being to the effect that Cremer wants to deal with everything at once, after concluding its claim against Huyton .
The odd result is that Cremer is pursuing, for the benefit of its Romanian seller, which knows nothing about it, a claim for about $207,000, on the resolution of which Cremer intends to remit an additional $36,666 which it has undoubtedly owed to its Romanian seller since the beginning of 1996, and that Cremer hopes to recover for its own account about $49,000, which seems to give it a net interest in this litigation of about $12,377, leaving aside interest .
The vessel arrived at Port Sudan on 22nd December 1995 .
Discharge took place and was completed by 2nd January 1996 .
The vessel\'s owners effected discharge, without production of the bill of lading, against, it seems, two indemnities, one dated 16th December 1995 issued in favour of the vessel\'s owners and Huyton by the Omdurman National Bank, requesting release of the cargo to Sotisco "c/o CIDICO" and a second indemnity issued to the vessel\'s owners by Huyton itself, likewise requesting delivery to Sotisco or their order .
Each indemnity contained an undertaking to produce the bill of lading as soon as available .
As to the first indemnity, Agrimpex had requested its local agent to arrange for receivers to issue such a bank indemnity on 21st December, but receivers must, it appears, have anticipated this request, whether because it was standard practice or because of some earlier request .
At about the same time Cremer\'s shipping agent, Proline of Hamburg, sent a message to JGP, expressed to be "on behalf of our principal ... which is presently the owner of the wheat on board of your good vsl" and asking JGP to advise "how the consignee will rcv the cargo, against presentation of first class bank guarantee??" .
The request may have been made in the light of the charter, which by then Cremer had received .
On or about 22nd December 1995, JGP appears to have replied that the vessel had arrived, that the consignees had surrendered a bank letter of indemnity in lieu of the original bill of lading and the master had on that basis instructed discharging to proceed .
Cremer did not protest about or react to this news .
The evidence before me shows that the whole cargo was initially discharged into storage bins of a silo owned by Agricultural Bank at Port Sudan, where, save as to 7251 tons, it remained at all material times thereafter .
Sidco was free to call for delivery of all or any part of the cargo in the silo at any time, and did in fact arrange for 7251 tons to be removed between 23rd and 30th December 1995 and transported inland by road or rail to three milling plants in as follows: (i) Khartoum Cereals Milling Plant: 2,576.986m/t; (ii) Ahlia Milling Plant: 1,998.756 m/t; and (iii) 2,675.397 m/t: El Bagair Milling Plant .
These 7251 tons were then warehoused and were not available for use in milling pending written inspection certification from the Sudanese Standards and Metrology Organisation, which was only obtained on 15th February 1996 .
Even then, due to quality issues which persisted, the 7251 tons were not in fact withdrawn prior to 8th July 1996 .
On 29th December 1995 Cremer and Huyton received from Olympic notice of a claim to a lien in respect of freight and "undisputed demurrage" at Constantza of $316,468.75 due under Olympic\'s charter with NBT .
The limited amount of demurrage claimed was of concern to Cremer, and was a factor in a developing belief that Huyton could not be trusted .
Accordingly, Cremer sought to obtain information from other sources about the actual charter position and rates, whilst telling Huyton no more than that it was checking figures or seeking documents .
On 10th January 1996 Cremer received another claim, this time from the vessel\'s owners, claiming a lien over the demurrage from Cremer in order to cover charter hire said to be unpaid by Olympic .
In a further message to Huyton on 11th January, excusing its non-payment of demurrage, Cremer referred to the notices received from both Olympic and the vessel\'s owners .
At the same time it took legal advice from its legal department as to their efficacy .
On 4th January 1996, Sotisco complained to Huyton about the gluten content of the wheat, whilst acknowledging that the contract contained no express term regarding gluten, and ended: \t"Finally, pls be notified tht above cargo will be kept in silo at Port Sudan for your account own risk and expense till this quality dispute is finalized. .
Contrary to this message, by 4th January 1996, the 7251 tons had in fact been removed inland .
Huyton did not at this stage pass on Sotisco\'s complaint to Cremer .
On the contrary, it responded to Sotisco on 3rd and 4th January, rejecting the relevance of gluten content under the contract terms and further relying on the provisions making condition on shipment final, in which connection it said that it would supply the relevant certificate in due course .
However, Huyton did on 6th January, without prejudice to its primary position, also send Sotisco a somewhat surprising message to the effect that, as it did not know "how our position with our sellers will be finalised" and as "sellers might ask to take away the goods" therefore "please be ready to put at sellers disposal the goods if so demanded by our sellers" .
This message did not result from any communication with Cremer about quality, there having been none .
Nor was it pursued .
Despite Mr Philippas\' reluctance to agree to this, it seems to me that it was probably designed to put pressure on Sotisco, by making them ponder the question whether they really were so dissatisfied with the quality .
On 9th January 1996 Cremer presented shipping documents to Huyton\'s bank, notifying Huyton that it had done so .
At 1529 hours on 12th January Huyton informed Cremer that Huyton\'s buyer was claiming the wheat to be very dry and of poor quality and said that it would have no alternative but to pass on any claim for damages which it might receiver .
At 1705 hours on 12th January 1996 Huyton rejected the shipping documents for a number of alleged discrepancies .
The extent to which these were actual discrepancies is in issue, but there were, in terms of the documentation stipulated by the sale contract, at least the following real discrepancies at this point in time - (i) no fumigation certificate had been presented as required, (ii) the certificate of origin did not state the bill of lading number or date, and (iii) the radiation certificate did not state that the goods were free from radioactive material .
At 1722 hours Huyton also insisted once again that Cremer settle immediately the $496,840.97 claimed for loadport demurrage .
On 15th January 1996 Cremer\'s administration department responded to Huyton\'s message regarding demurrage: \t"Our legal department has indicated to us that we are indeed in no way partner to the owners and therefore herewith confirm that we will arrange remittance without any further delay .
Indeed regret this inconvenience. .
The legal advice clearly related to the liens claimed by Olympic and the vessel\'s owners .
The rest of the message, in so far as it seemed to acknowledge liability for the full sum claimed, appears now to have been incautiously expressed by Cremer\'s administration department, since others responsible for the making and handling of this contract within Cremer were still very exercised by the unproven likelihood, as they perceived it, of a second voyage charter involving much lower loadport demurrage than that which Huyton was claiming from Cremer and a strong, though unproven suspicion that Huyton was trying to defraud Cremer .
By a message also prepared on 15th, but not apparently transmitted until 17th January Cremer responded to Huyton\'s rejection of the shipping documents .
Cremer asserted that the cargo had been "accepted upon completion of discharge" on 2nd January and that Huyton had thereby "waived any right to reject the documents as presented to you on 10th January as well as to refuse to pay for the cargo received" .
Cremer gave a time limit of 17th January for payment .
As to the documents presented, Cremer said that Huyton had also waived any discrepancies by failure to raise them within 48 hours, but that Cremer would without prejudice address them and revert in due course .
On 17th January 1995 Cremer extended its time limit to 19th January and otherwise repeated its position, ending that, should they not receive confirmation of payment \t"... we will ask for the immediate return of the contractual documents the consequence of which should be evident to you. .
In reply on 17th January, Huyton insisted on its position and on rectification of the discrepancies before payment, saying that the rights to reject the goods and the documents were separate rights, and welcoming the fact that Cremer was addressing the discrepancies .
Also on 17th, Cremer sent a detailed message addressing the alleged discrepancies without prejudice .
It rejected most of them .
In relation to the certificate of origin, it indicated that this included all that the Romanian authorities would include .
It did not address the limitation of the terms of the radiation certificate .
As to the fumigation certificate, Cremer said that \t"On you accepting and paying for the documents presented we hereby guarantee that we will send a fumigation certificate at our earliest convenience" .
Cremer ended: \t"Our comments/amendments to the documents are given without prejudice and will have no effect on your contractual obligation to pay for the goods after you took delivery" .
Huyton in reply at 1631 on 18th January reiterated that Cremer was required to present conforming documents before payment was due, but said that it would nonetheless seek its buyers\' agreement to most of them .
As to the fumigation certificate, Huyton said: \t"This is not good enough .
We have to present a fumigation certificate to our buyers in order to get paid and this is not a contract where we are obliged to accept a guarantee... \tOf course we will pay your documents when they conform to the contract (including our buyers being prepared to accept your non-conforming documents from us)..." In a message which appears effectively to have crossed with Huyton\'s message at 1631, Cremer at about 1622/24 on 18th January informed Huyton that as its deadline had passed without payment \t"... we therefore will instruct [the bank] to immediately return the contract documents to us .
\tBecause you have taken delivery of the cargo there is also no longer a need to deal with the discrepancies in the documents as pointed out by you and any guarantee by us in this respect is null and void .
\tWe consider you in breach of contract for refusing to pay for the cargo of which you took delivery. .
Agrimpex in reply at 1716 asked Cremer to reconsider its message in the light of Huyton\'s message at 1631, but Cremer at 1130 on 19th January refused to do so, asserting that: \t"The so-called faults in the documents are no longer relevant .
You have accepted delivery of the cargo and you must pay for it .
... \tOnce we have the documents in our hands, we will then take all steps necessary to protect our position. .
In reply on 19th, Huyton expressed its surprise and said: \t"Your refusal to remedy the defects in the documents clearly amounts to a repudiation of the contract which we hereby accept subject to our pre-existing claims against you .
These claims include the right to loadport demurrage ... \tWe find your argument that you do not have to present conforming documents to be quite incredible .
We also regard your obvious threat to present the B/Ls to the ship as unworthy of a company with your good name .
..." Cremer on 23rd January denied that it had repudiated, adding: \t"We also have not declined to remedy the defects of the documents .
We only clarified the contract situation by pointing out that we are no longer obliged to do so due to the fact that you took delivery of the goods .
\tTherefore your refusal to pay for the goods you have accepted constitutes a clear breach of the contract .
It is you who have repudiated it, which we hereby accept .
As a result we will claim arbitration against you ...." Huyton on 25th January maintained the correctness of its stance, adding: \t"The goods are accordingly at your disposal .
However, as we have demonstrated more than once, we were driven to cancel the contract by your refusal to present conforming documents .
Since it now appears that you want to present conforming documents, we are prepared, "without prejudice" to our rights to maintain that the contract was validly cancelled last Friday, to let you have a further opportunity to put the documents in order .
If you do this before close of business on 31st January, we will pay your invoice less the loadport demurrage (the amount of which we think you have actually agreed) and the costs we have incurred in establishing a guarantee for delivery of the goods without having the documents ...." Cremer on 25th January supplied Huyton with a revised radiation certificate conforming with the contract terms .
Also on 25th it repeated that Huyton was obliged to pay for the goods, on the basis that it had accepted them and had indeed presented a quality claim on 12th January .
Cremer went on: \t"Therefore it is quite incorrect to say that contract goods are, or even have been, at our disposal at the discharge port .
We know from our own sources of information that those goods were delivered to your sub-buyers and that a substantial quantity has been removed from the discharge port. .
Cremer also said: \t"We do not agree to accept payment less the port demurrage but request that the contract price be paid in full while we will execute the demurrage payment in accordance with the contract terms .
For our part, if payment is made now we will nevertheless be claiming from you interest for late payment and our other related expenses. .
In reply Huyton said that it was obvious that Cremer had taken legal advice, and set out the substance of legal advice which it said that it had taken supporting its position .
It said in particular: \t"4.\tYou clearly repudiated the contract at the end of last week and that repudiation was promptly accepted by us .
The goods have been returned to the port and they are at your disposal .
\t5.\tWithout prejudice to our strict rights ..., we have given you an opportunity to present conforming documents but we emphasise that they must conform to the contract and be presented within the time limit before we will agree to pay them .
If you fail to comply with these conditions, then the contract will remain cancelled and you will have all the problems of disposing of the goods for your own account .
\t6.\t.... We are perfectly entitled in a situation like this to insist that if you do present conforming documents within the that time limit, it is on terms that we can deduct the loadport demurrage and the bank guarantee expenses .
Of course, we could not do this if you were making a contractual presentation of the documents before the contract was cancelled but we are entitled to include these terms when offering to lift the cancellation when we are not legally obliged to do so .
\t7.\t.... We have amply demonstrated our willingness to seek a commercial settlement of the case and we are surprised that you have not responded in the same way, as our legal position is sound, it is going to be an expensive mistake for you to fail to agree with our terms. .
Huyton went on to confirm its appointment of its arbitrator for all disputes arising .
On 30th January Cremer repeated its prior position, adding only that it had, without prejudice to its position, no objection to the deduction of demurrage and bank guarantee expenses from the contract price, but that it would before giving final consent like to receive an explanation of the discrepancy between the demurrage being claimed by Huyton and that claimed by Olympic, and of the exact guarantee expenses claimed .
On the same day, Cremer was informed by its Sudanese agent with reference to the balance of 20,000 tons remaining in the port silo that "understand receivers starting taking cargo from silos to up country" .
This information was factually incorrect .
In response to Cremer\'s message of 30th, Huyton on 31st said that it had no contract with Olympic .
It pointed out also that Olympic had only referred to the "undisputed" demurrage owed by NBT and ended by saying that Cremer had on 15th January accepted and said that it would meet Huyton\'s demurrage claim .
By 31st January Cremer had supplied Huyton\'s bank with a revised certificate of origin meeting the contract terms as well as a fumigation certificate .
Huyton still had some reservations about the documents being presented, but appears to have been prepared to waive any of its remaining objections even if valid, provided at least that Cremer agreed its other terms .
Cremer on 1st February denied that it had on 15th January agreed to meet Huyton\'s full demurrage claim .
In this connection it asserted (contrary to the fact) that it had "subsequently" to 15th January received information indicating that the amount charged by Huyton was in excess of the amount that Huyton had actually to pay under its own charter .
Cremer went on to offer to accept deduction of the demurrage and guarantee expenses claimed, but under reserve "as we consider this amount .... in dispute" .
This led to Huyton on 2nd February replying: \t"We are not prepared to contemplate discussion or arbitration about demurrage or bank charges .
.... \tWe would remind you that we properly cancelled the contract when you repudiated it and we are perfectly entitled to maintain that cancellation unless you agree our terms .
If that does not happen, the goods will be at your disposal .
\t.... \tWe will pay your invoice on the basis that it amounts to the first proper presentation of the documents less $496,840.97 for demurrage and $65,245.40 for guarantee charges, but before being obliged to do so, we require your categoric assurance that you irrevocably withdraw your demand to arbitrate on any of these points .
If we do not have this assurance ...., then our cancellation of the contract will remain in effect. .
On 6th February Cremer said that it found Huyton\'s attitude "completely unreasonable", and that the simple facts were that \t"you have obtained delivery of the contract goods and you are refusing to pay the full contract price .
Despite of what you say we know that you are not in a position to place the goods at our disposal at the port of discharge .
Part of the goods have already been removed by your sub-buyers and we know that further quantities are being removed every day. .
This last, erroneous statement was doubtless based on the erroneous information received by Cremer from its local agent on 30th January .
Cremer went on: \t"Due to your breach of contract we are left in an impossible position .
We must accept that we have no real choice but to accept your terms for obtaining payment" .
Huyton on 6th February re-presented the documents to the bank under the letter of credit opened by Sotisco, but on 7th February asked Cremer for confirmation that \t"you regard presentation of the amended documents as the first proper presentation of documents and that you irrevocably withdraw your demand to arbitrate on demurrage and the guarantee charges" .
Cremer replied that it agreed these points with, for the reasons previously stated, "the greatest possible reluctance" .
Huyton instructed its bank to pay and it paid the net sum of $4,502,813.94 on 9th February 1996 .
On 14th February 1996, Cremer confirmed receipt of payment and said that it did not consider itself bound by the so called agreement to allow the deductions and give up the right to arbitrate about demurrage and guarantee expenses .
It said that it had been forced to agree these terms by Huyton\'s breach of contract and threat to refuse to pay the price despite the fact that Huyton had delivered the goods to its sub-buyers who were removing them from the port of discharge .
Cremer therefore confirmed its appointment of its arbitrator .
Huyton rejected Cremer\'s stance and indicated that it would if necessary commence the present action to restrain pursuit of any such arbitration .
The present action was thus begun on 19th September 1996 .
At one point, Huyton appeared to be trying to expand its scope to obtain a finding that the demurrage and guarantee charges were in fact due from Cremer to Huyton - a finding that if made would have effectively superseded the issue whether Cremer was entitled to pursue a claim in arbitration with regard to their deduction .
In the event, however, Mr Males accepted that that too must be a matter for the arbitrators, if it was open to Cremer to pursue any arbitration with regard to it at all .
All that I need say now is that it appears to me quite properly arguable that JGP\'s breaches of duty towards Huyton, known to and encouraged by NBT, would, assuming knowledge of all the facts now known, either have disentitled NBT from claiming demurrage at the rate of $11,000 from Huyton, or have made the Huyton/NBT charter voidable .
The purported agreement It is common ground that Cremer agreed irrevocably to withdraw its demand to arbitrate on the demurrage and guarantee charges .
Cremer submits that this purported agreement is either not binding or, if binding, not relevant .
It is not binding because it lacked consideration or was induced by duress .
It is irrelevant because, even if binding, it could not prevent Cremer pursuing in arbitration a claim to the balance of the price and/or interest for late payment or damages for breach of contract or repudiation .
I can take the latter point quite shortly .
If the agreement binds, then the re-presentation of the documents to the bank on 6th February 1996 must be taken as the first proper presentation, and the price must be taken to have been paid against such presentation, less the amount of demurrage and guarantee charges, in respect of which Cremer irrevocably withdrew any demand to arbitrate .
The true analysis is that Cremer must be regarded as having received payment of the price in full on first presentation of documents and as having accepted and satisfied in full a liability for the full amount of the demurrage and guarantee charges which Huyton claimed .
Payment of the price in full was effected, as to part by the transfer of $4,502,813.94 on 9th February 1996 and as to the rest by setting off the demurrage and guarantee charges amounting to $562,086.37 .
On this basis, there remained thereafter no balance of the price outstanding in respect of which Cremer could claim .
Nor could Cremer claim for late payment of the price .
The unpleaded suggestion, made it seems for the first time in Mr Schaff\'s skeleton, that Cremer could claim damages for breach or repudiation by Huyton in failing or refusing to pay the price prior to and on 23rd January 1996 is also unsustainable in circumstances where Cremer agreed to treat the presentation on 6th February as the first proper presentation .
In Cremer\'s points of defence in this action, it is suggested that, whatever else the purported agreement provided, it dealt only with the parties\' substantive rights and liabilities, and could not therefore affect the arbitrators\' jurisdiction .
But, before me, Mr Schaff did not suggest that the relief claimed by Huyton would be inappropriate or that the matter would still have to be left to the arbitrators, if I were to conclude that there was an agreement binding on and enforceable against Cremer, whereby Cremer agreed irrevocably to withdraw the demands which it presently wishes to pursue in arbitration against Huyton .
Was the agreement binding .
Mr Schaff submits, as I have indicated, that Cremer was not and is bound by the purported agreement for two reasons, the first absence of consideration and the second duress .
(a)\t Consideration In Mr Males Q.C\'s submission, consideration exists in the parties\' mutual agreement to resolve disputed issues .
In particular, Huyton was denying that it had any obligation to pay the price or that the contract had any continuing existence .
By agreeing to reinstate or recognise the contract, and to take up and pay against the amended and re-presented documents, Huyton was thus providing consideration .
Mr Schaff seeks to meet this contention, by arguing that Huyton was liable to pay the price and that its denial of liability was unjustified .
If the price was due in law, then payment of a lesser sum than that due cannot, he submits, amount to valid consideration:  re Selectmove Ltd.   [1995] 1 WLR 474  (C.A. .
In that case, however, there was no dispute about the total indebtedness .
In the present case, it is of the essence of Huyton\'s case that the agreement was reached to resolve a situation in which both sides were claiming that the contract was at an end and Huyton at least was claiming that it had no obligation with respect to the goods or their price at all .
Mr Schaff accepts that Huyton\'s denial of liability for the price was in good faith .
On the facts as I have outlined them, it seems to me clear also, as far as it is relevant, that Huyton\'s attitude in treating the contract as at an end was also in good faith .
Further, whether it be right or wrong in law, Huyton\'s stance was in my view one which a reasonable business-man in Huyton\'s position could at the time take .
Mr Schaff raises a question mark over Huyton\'s good faith in statements made that the goods were at Cremer\'s disposal - particularly Huyton\'s statement on 26th January 1996 that the goods removed from Port Sudan had been returned there, and Huyton\'s reiteration on 2nd February 1996 that, if no agreement was reached, the goods "will be at your disposal" .
Mr Males submits that Mr Schaff did not suggest such a lack of good faith to the relevant witness, Mr Philippas .
I consider, having examined the transcripts, that Mr Schaff\'s cross-examination did sufficiently do this, and that, even if it did not, no injustice would result, since there can be no doubt about Mr Philippas\' response .
But I am not satisfied that there was in fact any such lack of good faith .
It is evident, from the inaccurate information provided both to Huyton by Sotisco on 4th January and to Cremer by its local contact on 30th January 1996, that reliable information may be difficult to come by from the Sudan, and Sotisco at least may have its own motives for not keeping Huyton accurately informed .
Although it is true that Mr Philippas was vague about the precise sources of his information, and although the return of goods to Port Sudan from the interior would appear to have involved a substantial exercise, I am unable to conclude on the material before me that Mr Philippas was not repeating what he had been told and believed or that he was seeking deliberately to mislead Cremer, when he said on 26th January that the goods removed had been returned to Port Sudan and when he indicated on other occasions that the goods could and would, if necessary, be held at Cremer\'s disposal .
On the basis that Huyton was acting in good faith and (so far as this may also be material) that the stance which it took was reasonably arguable, the situation is one where, on the face, of it, it was open to the parties to reach a compromise, and where consideration for each party\'s agreement could be found in their mutual forbearance from maintaining or pursuing their original legal rights and remedies .
Mr Schaff accepts this in principle, but submits on the particular facts that the present agreement reached cannot be viewed as a compromise .
There was, he submits with particular reference to Cremer\'s message of 6th February 1996, never any intention on Cremer\'s part to compromise .
At this point the submissions relating to consideration and duress inter-relate .
I accept that an agreement which appears on its face to involve a compromise may be shown to have been induced by and be voidable for duress .
The duress may involve illegitimate pressure, consisting in the non-performance or threat of non-performance of an obligation the existence of which was apparently the subject of the compromise .
The party asserting duress will have however also to show on the facts that the illegitimate pressure was at least a significant cause inducing it to enter the contract .
Concurrent or contemporary protests that illegitimate pressure led to that party entering the agreement may be of considerable relevance in this latter respect - although neither sufficient nor essential .
But absent duress, I see no basis on which an apparent compromise may be ignored on the ground that one party did not really intend to compromise .
Contract is objective .
If, objectively, an agreement was reached on terms involving a compromise of opposing contentions, the agreement should be upheld, despite any concurrent protest or manifestation of subjective dissatisfaction about the circumstances in which the agreement came to be made - unless the agreement is voidable for causative duress .
This conclusion appears to me consistent also with the reasoning in  Maskell v. Horner  [1915] 3 K.B .
106 (see below) and with the treatment of the present problem in Goff and Jones on Restitution (Fourth Ed. .
at pages 53-54, 258 and 264-4 .
(b)\t Duress That economic pressure may amount to duress is now established law .
Mr Schaff submitted, with reference to Lord Goff\'s speech in  Dimskal Shipping Co. S.A. v. International Transport Workers Federation (The Evia Luck)  [1992] 2 A.C. 152, 165G, that there were two basic ingredients of duress of this character: (i) illegitimate pressure by one party (ii) constituting a significant cause inducing the other party to act as he did (in the present case to enter into the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996) .
The submissions before me canvassed a number of moot points .
These included questions whether these are the only ingredients of economic duress, what precisely each ingredient connotes and whether it is inflexible .
For the moment, I shall focus on Mr Schaff\'s case regarding the first ingredient, illegitimate pressure .
Illegitimate pressure One example of illegitimate pressure, in Mr Schaff\'s submission, is an actual or threatened breach of contract .
That, in Mr Schaff\'s submission, is this case .
Mr Schaff accepts that an actual or threatened breach of contract may lead to a valid compromise .
But the hallmark of such a compromise is, he submits, identified by Lord Reading C.J .
in  Maskell v. Horner  at p.118 as being a payment (or concession) made "voluntarily to close the transaction", rather than "under compulsion of urgent and compelling necessity" .
As to the latter situation, Lord Reading went on: \t"Payment under such pressure establishes that the payment is not made voluntarily to close the transaction ... .
The payment is made for the purpose of averting a threatened evil and is made not with the intention of giving up a right but under immediate necessity and with the intention of preserving the right to dispute the demand ...." Mr Schaff submits that it amounts to illegitimate pressure if a party threatens or commits a breach of contract, even if he acted in good faith, believing, and believing reasonably, that he was entitled to act as he did or threatened .
From the viewpoint of the other party, Mr Schaff points out, the impact of the threat or breach is the same, as is the pressure exerted on him, whether or not the first party is in good or bad faith .
Thus, he says, it is not critical or relevant to consider whether the party threatening or committing the breach was acting in bad faith .
If, however, it is relevant at all, bad faith should not be regarded as essential, but as no more than a factor which could make the court more ready to treat a party\'s conduct as illegitimate .
Mr Schaff\'s primary contention is that Huyton broke or threatened to break the contract with Cremer by refusing to pay the price .
Cremer\'s pleaded case is that Huyton accepted the goods and incurred liability for the price as a result of (i) the delivery of the goods ex-ship, (ii) Huyton\'s communication to Cremer of a quality and condition claim on 12th January based upon alleged liability to its sub-buyers and (iii) the removal of part of the goods to the interior .
Mr Schaff submits in these circumstances that the property in the goods passed to Huyton, and that the price became due under s.49 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 .
If that is wrong, he submits that Huyton was obliged to pay the price against presentation of the shipping documents and wrongfully failed to do so; it thus became liable to Cremer, not strictly for the price, but for damages measured by reference to the contractual price under s.50 .
Further alternatives which Mr Schaff sought to develop before me were that Huyton incurred, but refused to acknowledge, a liability, which was in economic terms the equivalent of the price, either in restitution or in damages on account of its retention and/or failure to return the goods to Cremer .
Taking first the contention that property passed, Mr Schaff accepts that the contract between Cremer and Huyton started lift as a contract providing for payment cash against documents .
He acknowledges therefore that property did not pass upon shipment and that Cremer, when it took as shipper a bill of lading made out to its order, reserved the right of disposal over the goods shipped in accordance with s.19(2) of the Act .
Mr Schaff submits however that the effect of what actually occurred was to pass property either on delivery of the wheat ex ship, or, alternatively, on or about 15th January 1996 when Cremer asserted that the cargo had been "accepted upon completion of discharge" on 2nd January and that Huyton had thereby "waived any right to reject the documents as presented to you on 10th January as well as to refuse to pay for the cargo received", and set a time limit for payment .
Mr Schaff put before me two possibilities, one that there was some contractual variation, the other that Cremer was entitled simply to waive any right of disposal after discharge and delivery to Huyton\'s sub-buyers and on that basis to treat properly as having passed .
Mr Schaff did not press before me the submission that the delivery of the goods to Huyton\'s sub-buyers on discharge at Port Sudan involved a variation of the contract terms, whereby property passed immediately on such delivery .
Mr Schaff acknowledged in this connection the force of the contrary view accepted by McNair J. in  Ginzberg v. Barrow Haematite Steel Co. Ltd.  [1966] 1 Ll.R .
343 .
There, under an ordinary c.i.f .
contract providing for payment CAD, delivery was, with the agreement of both the sellers and the shipowners\' agents, made at the discharge port to the buyers against a delivery order instead of the bill of lading .
The seller\'s invoiced the buyers after arranging such delivery, but the buyers did not pay, and on the next day went into receivership, after which the sellers claimed the goods back as owners .
McNair J. rejected the submission that property had passed on the delivery arranged, saying that the true inference was that the parties \t"intended merely to expedite the delivery for the benefits of the [buyers] .... without in any way departing from the fundamental principles of their c.i.f .
contract the implementation of which would safeguard them against losing the property in the goods until payment was made" .
The decision was referred to without dissent and indeed with express approval of Mustill L.J., with whom Woolf L.J .
agreed, in  Enichem Anic S.p.A. v. Ampelos Shipping Ltd. (The Delfini)  [1990] 1 Ll.R .
252, 264, 270 and 275-6 .
It is to be noted however that neither the factual situation nor the problem in issue was precisely the same as presented by the present case .
McNair J. did not hold that the passing of property was postponed until production of the bill of lading .
On the contrary he indicated that property would have passed on payment against the invoice which the sellers had presented in circumstances where the sellers themselves had been asked to arrange and were party to arranging delivery against a delivery order as opposed to the originally agreed bill of lading .
In  The Delfini  the facts were very different .
The original contract, although described as c.i.f., contained from the outset an alternative mode of performance providing for payment against a letter of indemnity - although even then apparently contemplating that delivery might already have occurred .
It also provided for a bank guarantee under which, as issued, the seller, Vanol, could claim the price without tendering any shipping documents .
Vanol invoiced the buyer, Enichem, for the goods while they were still in the course of carriage on 5th August .
Enichem then received the goods on discharge on 9th August and paid the seller\'s invoice on 12th August three days after discharge of the goods, in each case apparently against no shipping documents at all .
Enichem only received the bills of lading some eight days after it had so paid .
In these unusual circumstances, the Court of Appeal was unanimous in holding that property passed irrespective of the delivery of the shipping documents .
Mustill L.J .
was inclined to the view that it passed as early as 5th August .
Purchas and Woolf L.JJ .
considered that it passed upon discharge on 9th August or at latest upon payment on 12th August .
This decision shows that the passing of property in each case requires a close analysis of the particular contract and circumstances .
But as a decision on its particular facts, it does not to my mind greatly assist in the present case .
Here, the original contract was for payment CAD, with the inference that property was only to pass on such payment .
The shipping documents included a number of documents with contractual and commercial significance for both parties, irrespective of delivery .
This is particularly so, having regard to the provision in Cremer\'s contract with Huyton whereby shipped weight, quality, condition, description, sampling and analysis were to be final as certified on loading .
Further, on the evidence before me, Cremer was not party to any request to permit or agreement to allow the delivery of the goods at the discharge port without production of the bill of lading .
The most that can be said is that Cremer ascertained, through enquiry of JGP, that an arrangement for discharge and delivery was being made between the "receivers" and the vessel, that Cremer would or could have deduced from clause 45 of the charter (to which Cremer was not party) that Huyton would be providing (as it did) a letter of indemnity for this purpose, and that Cremer did not protest or react .
A letter of indemnity would be required because the bills of lading could have continuing significance .
Cremer was not, therefore, itself party to any arrangement made with the owners of the Mike K for discharge and delivery without production of the bill of lading at Port Sudan, still less to any variation of the provision for payment CAD in its contract with Huyton .
In my judgment, the case falls on the same side of the line as  Ginzberg  and there was no variation .
Cremer\'s apparent lack of concern about the whereabouts of the wheat is on its face a surprising feature, but one which cannot necessarily be attributed to any understanding that the wheat was no longer Cremer\'s .
Cremer was not aware that any wheat would be removed from Port Sudan, and Mr Carroux\'s evidence, for what it may be worth on such a point, was that Cremer would have expected the wheat to be retained in Port Sudan for Cremer\'s account .
Mr Philippas\'s evidence was that Huyton was not aware that any cargo had been removed from Port Sudan, until the latter half of January 1996 (as far as he could recall not until Cremer informed Huyton on 25th January 1996 of its information to this effect, whereupon Huyton then checked with its own sources and was informed, albeit erroneously, that the goods had in fact been returned to the port) .
I see no reason not to accept Mr Philippas\'s evidence on this .
Mr Birkholz did not insist on payment immediately after discharge, because he knew that Cremer had still to tender shipping documents .
When a dispute arose, Cremer\'s reaction on 17th/18th January was to call for the return to them by the bank of the shipping documents, in terms which indicated that Cremer would seek to use them to assert a continuing right to the goods .
All these points go to confirm my view that neither the discharge nor the delivery of the goods to Huyton\'s sub-buyers nor the removal of part of the goods from Port Sudan had the effect of passing property .
Mr Schaff sought support for his submission that Cremer could and did waive its right of disposal in dicta of Roche J. in  F.E .
Napier v. Dexters Ltd.  (1926) 26 Ll.L.R .
62; affirmed 184 (C.A.) .
The case concerned a shipment f.o.b .
London cash against mate\'s receipt .
Barrels of sweet fat were, on the buyer\'s instructions, delivered to the wharf alongside the buyer\'s vessel and were received there by the wharf company as agent for the buyers .
Arbitrators held the buyer liable for the price on the basis that property had passed .
Roche J. held that this was a finding of fact, which was not open to review by him, whatever he might have decided if the full evidence had been before him .
He added some words to explain the possible bases on which the arbitrators might have acted .
He said, inter alia, that \t"Under a contract which at any rate gives the right to the seller to reserve the right of disposal of the goods until his conditions are fulfilled, in my judgment, where a stipulation is unilateral, that is to say, for the benefit of the vendor, it is possible and lawful for the vendor upon appropriation to waive or abandon a stipulation which is in his favour. .
Distinguishing a previous authority, Roche J. pointed out that in it there had been a bill of lading, as distinct from "a mere mate\'s receipt" and that the bill of lading was in the hands of bankers .
In the Court of Appeal Bankes L.J .
held that buyers had failed to prove any reservation of property by the seller, but also saw no fault in law in Roche J\'s view .
Scrutton L.J .
stressed the distinction between a bill of lading and mate\'s receipt and the fact that most of the previous authorities about reserving a right of disposal were cases on bills of lading .
He concluded that, since it was a question of fact whether there was a right of disposal, Roche J. had been right to say that he could not interfere with the decision of the arbitrators .
Sargant L.J .
simply agreed, and had nothing to add .
In the circumstances, I find  Napier\'s  case is of no real assistance on the issue which I have to decide .
The present case concerns not only a bill of lading, but an elaborate set of contractually agreed documents with significance outside the mere field of carriage of the wheat from Constantza to Port Sudan .
The provision of such documents was an element in a mutual scheme, with implications going beyond the passing of property, particularly so far as concerns finality in respect of weight, quality, condition, description, sampling and analysis .
I would add, though not essential to my conclusion, that it was also, I think, foreseeable that Huyton would be on-selling on documentary terms, and that the presentation of shipping documents might continue to be of importance to Huyton for this reason, even though Cremer does not appear to have had particular knowledge that Huyton would require them under a letter of credit which Sotisco was in fact required to open .
Quite apart from that last point, the provision of shipping documents cannot in the present case be regarded, even after delivery of the cargo, as a matter wholly for the benefit of Cremer .
Huyton remained in my judgment entitled to expect that conforming documents would be presented to it before it paid and before property passed .
That, as it happens, corresponds with the way in which Cremer evidently saw the matter until Huyton began to point out deficiencies in the documents .
It also corresponds with that aspect of Mr Schaff\'s submissions, which rightly acknowledged the existence of a continuing contractual obligation on the part of Cremer (despite the delivery of the goods and other circumstances upon which Mr Schaff relied as making Huyton liable to pay the price) to present conforming documents to Huyton at some later stage .
Mr Schaff suggested that any breach of this continuing obligation had no effect on Huyton\'s obligation to pay the price, and would sound at worst in damages .
But the recognition of such an obligation itself indicates that the contractually agreed documentation cannot be regarded as being for the unilateral benefit of Cremer, and the suggestion that Huyton had to pay for the goods without receiving the documents, leaving it with an unsecured claim for damages if the documents subsequently proved not to match the contractual requirements, does not strike me as probable .
Mr Males sought to turn this improbability to Huyton\'s advantage in a different way, by contending that the passing of property was irrelevant, and of no assistance to Cremer in any event, because it should be regarded as only passing contingently on proper contractual documentation being subsequently presented, so that, if and when Huyton later validly terminated the contract for failure or refusal to present such documentation, the rejection would revest property and remove any right to the price .
This attempt to invert the reasoning in  Kwei Tek Chao v. British Traders and Shippers Ltd.  [1945] 2 K.B .
459, by making the passing of property in physically delivered goods conditional upon later examination of documents which, on this hypothesis, must have ceased to constitute documents of title whatever their other commercial or economic importance leaves me presently unconvinced, but I need not consider it further .
In the result, I reject Mr Schaff\'s primary case, that property passed either on delivery or on or about 15th January 1996 when Cremer sought payment without tendering conforming documents .
Mr Schaff\'s next submission rests on the proposition that conforming documents were at some stage presented, which Huyton wrongly failed and refused to pay .
That case cannot be sustained in relation to the period up to 19th and 23rd January 1996, the dates on which first Huyton and then Cremer purported to treat the sale contract as at an end .
At no time prior to 23rd January 1996 had Cremer ever presented shipping documents which complied with the contract .
On the contrary, Cremer was insisting that it did not have to present conforming documents and that Huyton was obliged to pay the full price without conforming documents .
Mr Schaff contends that Cremer\'s attitude in the exchanges which led to Huyton\'s claim to treat Cremer as in repudiation was not repudiatory .
In my judgment, it was repudiatory .
Cremer was purporting to set Huyton a deadline, failing compliance with which Cremer indicated that it would obtain return of the documents from its bank .
The terms in which Cremer said this indicated that Cremer intended to regard itself as free to recover the goods and to dispose of them elsewhere or at least to hold the ship responsible for them, if immediate payment was not made .
The matter must be viewed objectively and Mr Philippas\'s answer in cross-examination that Huyton thought from Cremer\'s message of 18th January 1996 that Cremer wanted the documents back on 18th January 1996 in order to correct and represent them to Huyton seems to me both unlikely to reflect accurately what Huyton understood at the time, and in any event to be irrelevant on the question what Cremer indicated objectively .
In the same message Cremer actually stated in clear terms that "because you have taken delivery of the cargo there is also no longer a need to deal with the discrepancies in the documents as pointed out by you and any guarantee by us in this respect is null and void" .
This is quite inconsistent with any intention to recover the documents in order to correct and represent them .
I am also unable to regard Cremer\'s attitude on 18th January as in any way equivocal or as relating to minor matters .
For reasons which I have already indicated, the presentation of conforming documents continued in my judgment to be a significant matter under the party\'s contract, despite the delivery of the goods .
Cremer was categorically denying Huyton\'s entitlement to such documents, and was itself laying down deadlines for a quite different character of performance to any agreed between the parties .
In my judgment, Huyton was entitled to treat Cremer\'s attitude as repudiatory .
Mr Schaff submits that, if that was so, Huyton was obliged to restore to Cremer the goods of which it had received delivery through its sub-buyers, and that, since Huyton did not do so, its purported acceptance of Cremer\'s repudiation was ineffective, and it was liable for the price of the goods received either as a matter of contract or on a quantum meruit .
In my judgment, this submission also fails .
Once Huyton had determined the contract, it was its duty to hold and, so far as necessary, make the goods available for Cremer .
I accept that this would involve making them available at Port Sudan so far as they had been removed from Port Sudan by Huyton\'s sub-buyers .
Mr Schaff points out that Huyton did not mention the goods in its message of termination on 19th January or until its further message of 25th January, sent after Cremer\'s response of 23rd January which referred yet again to the delivery of the goods to Huyton .
He also relies on the principle that, for goods to be validly rejected, there must be "a clear notice that the goods are not accepted and at the risk of the vendor": see Benjamin\'s Sale of Goods (Fifth Ed. .
para .
12-032, citing  Grimoldby v. Wells  (1875) L.R .
10 C.P .
391 .
That was a case on rejection of goods sold by sample which were found after delivery not to be equal to the sample .
The issue in such a case is whether the buyer has validly rejected in a manner revesting property .
In the present case, by contrast, the issue is whether Huyton validly and unequivocally treated as repudiated a contract under which possession had been given, although property had not yet passed .
What Huyton had to make clear was that it was treating Cremer as in repudiation, and, if it did this, the automatic effect in law was to oblige Huyton to put the goods of which it had received delivery at Cremer\'s disposal at Port Sudan, whether or not Huyton expressly adverted to that effect in its termination notice .
Further, once Cremer made a further reference to the delivery of the goods in its reply on 23rd January, Huyton did on 25th January confirm that the goods were at Cremer\'s disposal .
In the meantime, Huyton had no duty to take any positive steps such as re-shipping them, and Cremer itself did not request Huyton for information or assistance with a view to their recovery, or take any steps in that direction, except for enquiries as the goods\' whereabouts made through local agents and except in so far as recovery of the goods may have been part of the thinking behind Cremer\'s request to the bank to return the shipping documents .
Recovery of the goods must in fact always have appeared to Cremer to be a most unattractive option, whether or not they were at Port Sudan .
In these circumstances, I do not think that Huyton\'s claim to terminate the contract for repudiation can be disregarded as ineffective or internally inconsistent, simply because Huyton failed to address the natural consequences of such a step expressly .
Further, as a matter of fact, the evidence does not satisfy me that the goods could not and would not have been held at Cremer\'s disposal, and so far as necessary returned to Port Sudan for this purpose, had Cremer so insisted and had the parties not reached the arrangement which they did on 6th/7th February 1996 .
The probability is in my view that Mr Philippas of Huyton meant and believed what he said when he indicated on 25th January 1996 and subsequently that the goods were at Cremer\'s disposal, although Huyton\'s message of 25th January suggests that he also hoped that it would be possible to persuade Cremer to reach an accommodation .
Huyton\'s sub-buyers in the Sudan were, whatever the limitations of their legal position, far from satisfied with the goods, and Mr Philippas was well aware that this was the case .
He was in close touch with Sotisco and I accept his evidence that he was aware that the goods could not be used in the immediate future in the absence of Ministry approval .
I also accept his evidence that he sought to ascertain from Sotisco the whereabouts of the goods and was told that the quantity removed had been returned to Port Sudan .
The extent to which he positively instructed Sotisco not to use the goods is much less clear .
In answers to interrogatories sworn unsatisfactorily by an employee of Huyton in Switzerland, who appears to have had no direct knowledge of affairs and who Mr Philippas said had not contacted him about the answers, it was stated categorically that Huyton had not given notice to Sotisco that the goods should not be used .
Mr Philippas in fluctuating evidence sought at times to suggest that he must have given some such notice .
I do not accept that he gave such a notice in so many terms .
But I do accept that he enquired of Sotisco regarding the status and location of the goods and that the answers left him satisfied that the goods could be held at Cremer\'s disposal if required .
If, as I accept, he was given misleading information to the effect that the goods removed from Port Sudan had been returned there, the context is in fact likely to have been some wish or willingness on Sotisco\'s part to show that the goods were not required and/or would be available for removal .
These conclusions make it strictly unnecessary to consider the implications of Cremer\'s own purported termination of the contract on 23rd January .
This could only become relevant on an assumption that Huyton\'s termination on 19th January was ineffective .
But, on that assumption, I do not think that Cremer\'s termination could simply be ignored, as Mr Schaff invited .
If Huyton\'s stance in purporting to terminate for breach by Cremer was unjustified, then Cremer\'s termination was on its face valid, and, since the property had not passed, entitled Cremer to recover possession of the goods .
The fact that Cremer did not claim or seek such possession would not in this situation affect the validity of its termination of the contract, or entitle Cremer to the price or an identical claim in restitution .
Had Cremer shown that Huyton could not return the goods, Cremer could no doubt have acquired a restitutionary right or a right in damages; the measure of recovery might then have related to the value of the goods in the Sudan rather than the contract price, although there is in fact no evidence which would enable any positive conclusion as to what, if any, difference, might exist between these two .
As it is, I am not satisfied that Cremer could not have recovered the goods, if it had wanted and sought them .
It is not in these circumstances established that Cremer had any claim to the price, still less any claim to a sum in restitution or damages equating with the price .
The result is that Cremer had no continuing right after 19th or alternatively 23rd January 1996 either to present conforming documents and to claim payment of the price or, if it be material, to require payment of the price or any equivalent sum by Huyton on any other basis .
Assuming that by the end of January Cremer had obtained amended documents which would have conformed with the contract requirements, this is irrelevant in circumstances where the contract had come to an end at least a week earlier .
It follows from these conclusions that Cremer is unable to establish, in any shape or form, the illegitimate pressure on which it relies in support of its claim that the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996 is voidable for duress .
The illegitimate pressure pleaded is wrongful failure to pay the purchase price .
If one looks at the matter more widely, as Mr Schaff did during the hearing, Cremer has not shown that there was any other illegitimate pressure in the form of failure to pay the equivalent value of the goods in restitution or damages .
One is left with an agreement made because Cremer found itself faced with a situation where it was unattractive to seek to recover the goods in the Sudan, and to dispose of them there or elsewhere .
In the absence of any illegitimate pressure from Huyton to make that arrangement, there is no basis for avoiding the arrangement, and Huyton is entitled to relief preventing Cremer from pursuing an arbitration in breach of it .
Economic duress on a contrary assumption Having regard to the evidence and submissions which I have heard, I shall also consider the position viewed on a contrary assumption .
There are at least two possibilities, arising, as I have already indicated, from Cremer\'s case as to the effect of the discharge and delivery of the goods to Huyton\'s sub-buyers, the removal of goods from the port and/or Cremer\'s decision to treat the goods as belonging to Huyton and to treat the price as due prior to presentation of the shipping documents .
One possibility is that property in the goods passed and the price became payable upon its passing .
The other is that the price became due and that the property would have passed upon payment (as in  Ginzberg ), but did not because the price was not paid .
On either basis, Huyton\'s purported acceptance on 19th January 1996 of a repudiation by Cremer was ineffectual, but Huyton was thereby itself in repudiation which Cremer accepted on 23rd January .
On the former scenario, Cremer\'s acceptance of Huyton\'s repudiation cannot, I think, have revested property, or have discharged Huyton\'s liability for the price; it must simply have discharged Cremer from further performance, in particular from any obligation to present conforming shipping documents .
On the latter scenario, since property never passed, Cremer\'s acceptance of Huyton\'s repudiation left Cremer with the property in the goods, but also with a claim against Huyton to make good any difference between the value of the goods realisable after their recovery in the Sudan and the contract price .
The economic effect of the latter scenario would be likely to equate, in a more complex way, with that of the former scenario .
Cremer\'s case that Huyton applied illegitimate pressure inducing Cremer to make the agreement of 6th/7th February is based expressly on the former scenario .
But Mr Schaff\'s submissions also embraced the latter scenario, on the footing, in effect, that Huyton could, upon that scenario, be regarded as applying illegitimate pressure, by its assertion that it was Cremer who was in breach and by its disclaimer of any responsibility for the contract price at any stage, whether as such or, after Cremer\'s acceptance of Huyton\'s repudiation, as a measure of liability for wrongful refusal to accept and pay for the goods .
The two basic ingredients of duress have been identified earlier in this judgment .
Leaving aside for the moment questions of onus, it must at least be the case that Huyton applied illegitimate pressure and that such pressure was a significant cause inducing Cremer to make the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996 .
The assumption, on which I am now approaching the matter, that Huyton\'s original contractual position was unjustified, does not alter the fact that Huyton both believed at the time in the correctness of its case, and was not, in my view, unreasonable to do so .
The rights and wrongs of a complex situation were - and still are - difficult to analyse .
Mr Schaff submits that, if Huyton\'s position could now be seen to have been unjustified, it must follow that Huyton applied illegitimate pressure on Cremer (in which case, he submits, the only remaining issue would be causative inducement) .
Mr Males submits that other considerations are or may also be relevant, on one or other of various bases .
He starts by suggesting a third ingredient of economic duress, that the illegitimate pressure must have left the innocent party with no reasonable alternative to the course he took .
He distinguishes in this context between "commercial pressure", even in consisting of an actual or threatened breach of contract, and coercive pressure justifying legal protection .
He further suggests that the bona fides and reasonableness of the position which Huyton adopted are relevant, either when determining whether illegitimate pressure was applied or in some other way .
It is not, I think, difficult to see how the bona fides and/or arguability of Huyton\'s position could be relevant when assessing whether Huyton\'s actual or threatened breach was a significant cause of the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996 - at least so far as they were apparent to and impacted on Cremer\'s thinking .
A party who perceives that the other party is acting in bad faith may be more likely to feel exposed and coerced .
But Mr Males submits that the relevance of good or bad faith is not confined to situations where its existence or absence is apparent to the other party .
In addition, Mr Males submits that the concept of a "significant cause" requires the court to consider not merely subjective causation, but, in effect, the causative potency of an actual or threatened breach of contract, viewed objectively; on this basis too the court must, he submits, assess whether a reasonable person would or could have acted as the actual innocent party before the court did, and whether he would have done so because he had no practical choice but to submit, or for other reasons .
I start with the requirement that the illegitimate pressure must, in cases of economic duress, constitute a "significant cause" (cf per Lord Goff in  The Evia Luck , at p.165, cited above) .
This is contrasted in Goff and Jones on The Law of Restitution (4th ed. .
p.251, footnote 59 with the lesser requirement that it should be "a" reason which applies in the context of duress to the person .
The relevant authority in the latter context is  Barton v. Armstrong   [1976] AC 104  (P.C. .
(a case of threats to kill) .
The majority there discussed at p.118B "whether it was necessary for Barton in order to obtain relief to establish that he would not have executed the deed in question but for the threats", having pointed out that only in the most unusual cases could there by any doubt whether threats to kill unless a document was executed had operated to induce its execution .
The majority referred at p.118H to the principle that "Once make out that there has been anything like deception, and no contract resting in any degree on that foundation can stand", and said at p.119A: \t"Their Lordships think that the same rule should apply in cases of duress and that if Armstrong\'s threats were "a" reason for Barton\'s executing the deed he is entitled to relief even though he might well have entered into the contract if Armstrong had uttered no threats to induce him to do so. .
After reviewing the facts, the majority then said at p.120: \t"If Barton had to establish that he would not have made the agreement but for Armstrong\'s threats, then their Lordships would not dissent from the view that he had not made out his case .
But no such onus lay on him .
On the contrary it was for Armstrong to establish, if he could, that the threats which he was making and the unlawful pressure which he was exerting for the purpose of inducing Barton to sign the agreement and which Barton knew were being made and exerted for this purpose in fact contributed nothing to Barton\'s decision to sign .
\t.... \tThe proper inference to be drawn from the facts found is .... that though it may be that Barton would have executed the documents even if Armstrong had made no threats and exerted no unlawful pressure to do so, the threats and unlawful pressure in fact contributed to his decision to sign the documents and to recommend their execution by Landmark and the other parties to them. .
Whether this language does more than reverse the onus, so as to require the party responsible for the illegitimate pressure to establish that the agreement would anyway have been made, even had it not been present, is open to debate .
The minority, Lords Wilberforce and Simon, appear to have thought that it did .
After seeking to encapulate the test proposed by the majority as requiring the illegitimate means used to have been " a  reason (not  the  reason, nor the  predominant  reason nor the  clinching  reason) why the complainant acted as he did", they went on: \t"We are also prepared to accept that a decisive answer is not obtainable by asking the question whether the contract would have been made even if there had been no threats because, even if the answer to this question is affirmative, that does not prove that the contract was not made because of the threats. .
The use of the phrase "a significant cause" by Lord Goff in  The Evia Luck , supported by the weighty observation in the footnote in Goff & Jones, suggests that this relaxed view of causation in the special context of duress to the person cannot prevail in the less serious context of economic duress .
The minimum basic test of subjective causation in economic duress ought, it appears to me, to be a "but for" test .
The illegitimate pressure must have been such as actually caused the making of the agreement, in the sense that it would not otherwise have been made either at all or, at least, in the terms in which it was made .
In that sense, the pressure must have been decisive or clinching .
There may of course be cases where a common-sense relaxation, even of a but for requirement is necessary, for example in the event of an agreement induced by two concurrent causes, each otherwise sufficient to ground a claim of relief, in circumstances where each alone would have induced the agreement, so that it could not be said that, but for either, the agreement would not have been made .
On the other hand, it also seems clear that the application of a simple "but for" test of subjective causation in conjunction with a requirement of actual or threatened breach of duty could lead too readily to relief being granted .
It would not, for example, cater for the obvious possibility that, although the innocent party would never have acted as he did, but for the illegitimate pressure, he nevertheless had a real choice and could, if he had wished, equally well have resisted the pressure and, for example, pursued alternative legal redress .
I turn therefore to consider other ingredients of economic duress .
One possibility, harking back for example to a word used by the minority in  Barton , is that the pressure should represent the "pre-dominant" cause .
Professor Birks in An Introduction to the Law of Restitution (1985), pp.182-3 has suggested that, in cases such as  Pao On v. Lau Yiu   [1980] AC 614  where relief was refused on the ground that there had been "commercial pressure but no coercion" (p.635), the court was, in effect, insisting "on a more severe test of the degree of compulsion than is found in  Barton v. Armstrong ", securing what he describes as "a concealed discretion to distinguish between reasonable and unreasonable, legitimate and illegitimate applications of this species of independently unlawful pressure" .
His own preference, he indicated, was for "the simplest and more open course .... to restrict the right to restitution to cases in which one party sought,  mala fide  to exploit the weakness of the other" .
These comments highlight the extent to which any consideration of causation in economic duress inter-acts with consideration of the concept of legitimacy .
Mr Males adopts the same approach as Professor Birks in relation to apparent contractual compromises for good consideration, suggesting that here at least bad faith ought to be a pre-condition to relief .
The law will of course be cautious about re-opening an apparent compromise made in good faith on both sides .
But it seems, on the one hand, questionable whether a "compromise" achieved by one party who does not believe that he had at least an arguable case is a compromise at all - though it may be upheld if there is other consideration (cf  Occidental Worldwide Investment Corp. v. Skibs A/S Avanti (The Siboen and The Sibotre ) [1976] 1 L.R .
293 at p.334 (right)); and, on the other hand, difficult to accept that illegitimate pressure applied by a party who believes bona fide in his case would never give grounds for relief against an apparent compromise .
Another commentator, Professor Burrows, in The Law of Duress (1993) pp.181-2, has suggested that the concept of legitimacy is open to some flexibility or at least qualification, so that a threatened or actual breach of contract may not represent illegitimate pressure if there was a reasonable commercial basis for the threat or breach, e.g .
because circumstances had radically changed .
This suggestion too, is by no means uncontentious .
As to authority, in  The Siboen and The Sibotre , one of the early cases on economic duress, Kerr J. indicated at p.335 (left) - in rejecting a contrary submission by Mr Robert Goff Q.C .
as he was - that he did not think that bad faith had any relevance at all .
On the other hand, in McHugh J.A\'s judgment in the Supreme Court of New South Wales in  Crescendo Management Pty .
Ltd. v. Westpac Banking Corp.  (1988) 19 NSWLR 40 at p.46, referred to by Lord Goff in  The Evia Luck , McHugh J.A .
said that "Pressure will be illegitimate if it consists of unlawful threats or amounts to unconscionable conduct" .
It is also clear that illegitimate pressure may exist, although the threat is of action by itself lawful, if in conjunction with the nature of the demand, it involves potential blackmail: see  Thorn v. Motor Trade Association  [1937] A.C. 797, esp .
at pp.806-7, cited in Lord Scarman\'s dissenting judgment in  Universe Tankships  at p.401, and  CTN Cash and Carry Ltd. v. Gallagher Ltd.  [1994] 4 AER 713 .
And in this last case, Steyn L.J .
as he was contemplated the possibility that unconscionable conduct might have a yet wider ambit .
He said: \t"Outside the field of protected relationships, and in a purely commercial context, it might be a relatively rare case in which "lawful act duress" can be established .
And it might be particularly difficult to establish duress if the defendant bona fide considered that his demand was valid .
In this complex and changing branch of the law I deliberately refrain from saying "never". .
That good or bad faith may be particularly relevant when considering whether a case might represent a rare example of "lawful act duress" is not difficult to accept .
Even in cases where the pressure relied on is an actual or threatened breach of duty, it seems to me better not to exclude the possibility that the state of mind of the person applying such pressure may in some circumstances be significant, whether or not the other innocent party correctly appreciate such state of mind .
"Never" in this context also seems too strong a word .
In  The Evia Luck , Lord Goff did not speak in absolute terms .
He said, with reference to the previous authorities, that \t".... it is now accepted that economic pressure may be sufficient to amount to duress for this purpose, provided at least that the economic pressure may be characterised as illegitimate and has constituted a significant cause inducing the plaintiff to enter the relevant contract" .
This description itself leaves room for flexibility in the characterisation of illegitimate pressure and of the relevant causal link .
Lord Goff was identifying minimum ingredients, not ingredients which, if present, would inevitably lead to liability .
The recognition of some degree of flexibility is not, I think, fairly open to the reproach that it introduces a judicial "discretion" .
The law has frequently to form judgments regarding inequitability or unconscionability, giving effect in doing so to the reasonable expectations of honest persons .
It is the law\'s function to discriminate, where discrimination is appropriate, between different factual situations - as it does, to take one example, when deciding whether or not to recognise a duty of care .
The present context is intervention in relation to bargains or payments in relatively extreme situations .
Steyn L.J .
in  CTN Cash and Carry  cited, albeit in the context of threats involving no unlawful act, an aphorism of Oliver Wendell Holmes "that general propositions do not solve concrete cases" and went on: \t"It may only be a half-truth, but in my view the true part applies to this case .
It is necessary to focus on the distinctive features of this case, and then to ask whether it amounts to a case of duress. .
A similar approach appears to me to be appropriate in the present context .
In older authorities, relief against economic duress was said to require illegitimate pressure coercing the innocent party\'s will and vitiating consent (cf  The Siboen and The Sibotre  at p.336 and  Pao On v. Lau Yiu Long  at p.635) .
Lord Goff in  The Evia Luck  doubted whether it was helpful to speak in such terms, and referred to McHugh J.A\'s comments to that effect in the  Crescendo  case .
The approach there adopted by McHugh J.A., at p.45, was based on statements by the House of Lords in  DPP v. Lynch   [1975] AC 653 , to the effect that, in cases of duress, "the will [is] deflected, not destroyed" .
Even on this more generous formulation, a simple enquiry whether the innocent party would have acted as he did "but for" an actual or threatened breach of contract cannot, I think, be the hallmark of deflection of will .
Whether because the specific ingredients identified by Lord Goff should be interpreted widely or because it is implicit in the flexibility of Lord Goff\'s formulation and the underlying rationale of the law\'s intervention to prevent unconscionability, relief must, I think, depend on the court\'s assessment of the qualitative impact of the illegitimate pressure, objectively assessed .
It is not necessary to go so far as to say that it is an inflexible third essential ingredient of economic duress that there should be no or no practical alternative course open to the innocent party .
But it seems, as I have already indicated, self-evident that relief may not be appropriate, if an innocent party decides, as a matter of choice, not to pursue an alternative remedy which any and possibly some other reasonable persons in his circumstances would have pursued .
Relief may perhaps also be refused, if he has made no protest and conducted himself in a way which showed that, for better or for worse, he was prepared to accept and live with the consequences, however unwelcome .
Factors such as these are referred to as relevant to relief against duress in both  The Siboen and The Sibotre  and  Pao On , although in some contexts it may also be possible to rationalise them by reference to other doctrines such as affirmation or estoppel .
The emphasis, now to be discarded, in such cases on coercion of will does not, it seems to me, mean that such factors are no longer relevant .
Taking, for example,  Pao On , the complainant there was able, in the face of the illegitimate pressure, to consider its position, to take alternative steps if it wished, and to decide, as it apparently did (and however wrongly with hindsight), that the substitute arrangements proposed were of no real concern or risk to it and that it was preferable to agree to them, rather than become involved in litigation .
Although there would have been no re-negotiation at all "but for" illegitimate pressure, the relationship between the illegitimate pressure applied and the substitute arrangements made was not of a nature or quality, or sufficiently significant in objective terms in deflecting the will, to justify relief .
Examination of the same relationship may also involve taking into account the extent to which the party applying illegitimate pressure intended or could reasonably foresee that pressure which he applied would lead to the agreement or payment made, or at least the extent to which factors extraneous to that party played any important role .
The onus of proof in respect of economic duress is another relatively unexplored area .
McHugh J.A .
in  Crescendo  assumed that it would be reversed in accordance with the principle applied by the Privy Council in  Barton v. Armstrong  .
That was a case of threats to kill, where the Privy Council took as an analogy dispositions induced by fraud .
With such threats, as the Privy Council pointed out, it is only in the most unusual circumstances that there can be any doubt whether the threats operated to achieve their intended aim or known effect .
The Privy Council\'s recognition of, not merely the prima facie factual inference, but of an apparent shifting of the legal onus, cannot, I think, be transposed automatically to the context of the more recently developed tort of economic duress .
Threats to the person are, by definition, mala fide acts .
Economic duress, as this case shows, embraces situations where the party applying what can, at least with hindsight, be shown to have been economic pressure held the view quite reasonably at the time that he was entitled to do so .
There is, also, as indicated above, a major difference between the substantive test of causation in cases of threats to the person and in cases of economic duress .
Leaving aside cases of fraud and fraudulent misrepresentation, mentioned in  Barton v. Armstrong , the law normally treats the party seeking relief in respect of a breach of contract or seeking to set aside a bargain on grounds, such as innocent misrepresentation, as under a legal onus to prove his case on causation .
The particular facts may give rise to an inference of loss or inducement, which may shift a factual onus to the other party, but the underlying legal onus remains at the end of the day on the party seeking relief (cf e.g .
Marc Rich & Co. v. Portman  [1996] 1 Ll.R .
430, 442, considering  Pan Atlantic Insurance Co Ltd. v. Pine Top Insurance Co. Ltd.  [1994] 2 Ll.R .
427 on misrepresentation and non-disclosure in relation to insurance contracts) .
It would seem to me, as presently advised, that this could represent the appropriate general approach in cases of economic duress .
I am conscious that the question of onus of proof was only briefly touched on before me without citation of authority from outside the field of economic duress, but in view of my other conclusions I have not felt it necessary or appropriate to call for further submissions on it .
Turning now to the facts of the present case, the evidence called by Cremer, from Mr Birkholz in particular, was that Cremer felt under extreme and increasing pressure during the period leading up to the agreement of 6th/7th February .
A number of contributing factors can be identified: (a)\tCremer was strongly suspicious about Huyton\'s demurrage claims .
It suspected, according to Mr Birkholz\'s witness statement and evidence, that the Huyton/NBT document was not a genuine charter, that it had been brought into existence for the purpose of brining a demurrage claim against Cremer at a higher rate, and that Huyton was trying to defraud Cremer .
(b)\tMr Birkholz was concerned at the quality claim which Huyton raised on 12th January, and his "distrust was confirmed" when three days later Huyton raised an issue of discrepancies of documents .
(c)\tCremer (rightly) did not believe the information relayed to it (innocently) by Huyton on 25th January to the effect that the part of the cargo removed inland had been returned to Port Sudan .
Further, it was itself (wrongly) informed on 30th January that further goods were being removed by the receivers, and showed this concern when it said on 6th February that "we know that further quantities are being removed every day" .
In these circumstances, Cremer did not believe that Huyton was holding or capable of holding the goods at its disposal, as Huyton said on and after 25th January that it was doing; and therefore distrusted Huyton on this basis too .
(d)\tAfter the dispute arose whether Huyton was bound to pay without Cremer presenting conforming documents, and both parties claimed to have terminated the contract, Cremer found itself in a situation where the goods were in the Sudan, and it had a choice between (i) continuing to pursue a claim to the price, if necessary by arbitration, or (ii) accepting Huyton\'s stance and reclaiming the goods or (iii) reaching some compromise .
(e)\tMr Birkholz said that in this situation he became very scared; it was "alarming" to have Huyton as a buyer; his witness statement described Huyton as a "front" for Agrimpex, and suggested that, at the start of negotiations, Cremer had thought it would be dealing with Agrimpex, but was happy to proceed with Huyton because Huyton was related to Agrimpex .
Taking these factors in turn: as to (a), the suspicion that Huyton was party to putting forward a false charter and a false demurrage claim is not one which can, on the material before me, be pursued .
Nor was it pursued before me by Mr Schaff, although he sought to reserve his position so far as possible before any arbitrators .
The highest that Mr Schaff could put the matter was to suggest that Huyton ought, objectively, to have investigated further (and was in that sense responsible for both parties\' ignorance of JGP\'s and NBT\'s misconduct), once Mr Amaslidis of Agrimpex discovered that NBT itself had taken the vessel on voyage charter, as he did in early December 1995 .
Mr Amaslidis learned this from Jens Gran of JGP, who indicated that he himself had not been informed of it by Mr Lund at the time when the charter was made .
JGP were trusted brokers .
What Mr Amaslidis learned from Mr Jens Gran revealed that one of JGP\'s employees, Mr Lund, had broken Agrimpex\'s policy regarding voyage charters .
Mr Amaslidis rang Mr Lund to protest, and also requested him to obtain a copy of the head charter .
Mr Schaff can point to a failure to follow up this request .
But the request was made in the context of what appeared to be no more than a breach of a policy pursued by Agrimpex, which Mr Jens Gran himself had disclosed .
Agrimpex and Huyton remained ignorant of the much more serious breaches of duty, which can now be seen to have taken placed between Mr Lund and Mr Gunnar Gran, directed against Huyton\'s interests, as well as ignorant of the family relationship between JGP and NBT (which itself would no doubt have raised questions) .
In parenthesis, it now also seems clear, from the facts recounted at the beginning of this judgment and from JGP\'s documents obtained under subpoena by Cremer, that Mr Lund and Mr Gunnar Gran (and I have to say that it seems from his signature of certain false addenda, although he did not give evidence before me, quite likely also Mr Jens Gran) would have gone to considerable lengths to put Huyton off the scent, had Huyton sought to investigate further, so that it is unclear that any further attempts to obtain the head voyage charter or to investigate further would at that stage have led anywhere .
As it was, Huyton\'s request for the head charter, in order to see the profit which it was to be presumed that NBT was likely to be making, was not pursued after the holiday period at a time when attention was being directed to other developments .
The limited demurrage for which Olympic claimed a lien on 29th December 1995 was also not a matter on which Mr Amaslidis focused, or indeed, a matter which Cremer - co-addressee of Olympic\'s notice - raised with Huyton for another month .
Laytime conditions under back to back voyage charters could differ, part-payment of demurrage might have been made and some difference in demurrage to NBT\'s profit would not of itself be surprising - it would reflect the very reason why it was Huyton\'s policy not to voyage charter vessels from other voyage charters .
On 30th January and 1st February 1996, Cremer did for the first time disclose concerns about the demurrage in the form of an assertion - not based on more than suspicion, and not in fact correct - that Huyton was party to a charter at lower rates than those claimed from Cremer .
Huyton knew that this was not the case .
Viewing the matter on the basis that Huyton knew that Mr Lund had breached Huyton\'s internal policy but were as much deceived as anyone about JGP\'s and NBT\'s wider misconduct and deception, I do not think that Mr Schaff\'s criticism of Huyton\'s conduct, as objectively unreasonable, can be sustained .
It would not be right, in my view, to treat Huyton as in effect responsible for Cremer\'s suspicion either arising or persisting .
Cremer\'s final concerns, when Huyton passed on a quality claim and then raised the question of discrepancies, do not seem to me to have been objectively based on anything that Huyton actually did or said .
Huyton\'s conduct was to my mind commercially understandable and reasonable, right or wrong, having regard to its sub-buyer\'s attitude and its need for proper shipping documents to present under the letter of credit opened by its sub-buyer .
As to (b), both parties were, as I find, victims of misinformation from the Sudan about the movements of goods .
Cremer evidently viewed Huyton as misleading it about the location of the part of the goods originally moved .
Huyton was, again, being misled, rather than being misleading .
Cremer was then given misleading information by its own local agent, information which, if true - as Cremer clearly thought it to be - must have sounded very clear warning signals about Huyton\'s intentions .
If Huyton was being dishonest about what was happening to the goods, the risk that Huyton intended that Cremer should get neither the price nor the goods must have seemed very large .
In fact, however, Huyton was not being dishonest, and I am not satisfied that the goods could not and would not have been returned to Cremer\'s custody, at Port Sudan, had Cremer really ever wanted this .
As to (c), the views expressed in Mr Birkholz\'s witness statement about Huyton\'s position as a "front" were not justified in evidence, but they may again have represented the sort of thinking to which Cremer fell prey at the time, although it was, so far as appears, unjustified .
Although Huyton\'s accounts have not been produced, and were not apparently requested on discovery, Huyton was able to pay the $4,502,813.94 on 9th February 1996 without difficulty and before recovering any sum from Sotisco .
Taking next (e), Cremer\'s fears about Huyton\'s status, financial and otherwise, appear to have developed ex post facto, after the dispute arose .
This contract was in fact made against a background of previous contracts which Huyton (as distinct, it appears, in one case from Cremer) had performed entirely satisfactorily, even though none had been as large as this .
Cremer was, I find, perfectly happy at the outset of the present contract to deal with Huyton .
I turn lastly to (d) .
The reality, in my judgment, is that Cremer would not have wished to have the goods back in the Sudan in any event, if it could avoid that .
Its natural reaction would always have been to seek a solution whereby Huyton agreed to take or keep them, and paid their price .
Mr Schaff said that this was a situation where illegitimate pressure by Huyton, in the form of a threat not to pay the price even though it or its equivalent was due, left Cremer with no option but to accept Huyton\'s terms .
Mr Birkholz said that Cremer was confident in its position that the price was due .
If that was certain to be the outcome of any dispute, then all that Cremer had to be concerned about was Huyton\'s ability to pay .
It is not suggested that Cremer faced any overwhelming or unduly onerous financial burden having to carry the $5 million until it succeeded in arbitration, assuming that Huyton could and would then have paid any such sum which Cremer was awarded .
Cremer\'s concern was about Huyton\'s ability and willingness to pay any such sum .
But that concern was, it seems to me, substantially generated by matters for which Huyton had no responsibility, and which lay outside any refusal by Huyton to make such payment - such as Cremer\'s perception that Huyton was an untrustworthy front, based in turn on Cremer\'s belief that Huyton was deceiving it about demurrage and the whereabouts of the goods .
In addition, however, I do not believe that Cremer can have been impervious to the thought that it might be wrong in its assertion that the price was due .
If it was or might be wrong, then an adamant insistence on receiving payment or going to arbitration could have led to a situation, some time after the event, when Cremer had to attempt to dispose of the goods at whatever might then be their market value .
Again, Cremer clearly thought that Huyton or its sub-buyers were making off with the goods, and would by then have irreversibly disposed of or used them .
This thinking too is not borne out by the actual facts, as they are now known, and, once again, it was Cremer\'s mistaken perception of what Huyton was doing, rather than the actual or threatened breach by non-payment itself, which in this situation, in my judgment, played the most powerful role in Cremer\'s decision to accept the compromise .
Mr Males also relied on the smallness of the concession which Huyton extracted .
But it seems to me that Mr Schaff is right, in principle, that the small size of an advantage extracted does not meant that it was not extracted by duress .
Where the advantage being sought is small and easy to concede, the party under pressure may find it more difficult to refuse to concede it .
Having said that, the smallness of the benefit required is also a factor which might make the party pressed to concede it more ready to do so in the interests of amicable compromise, even though other alternatives would have been open to him .
Although Huyton\'s claim to the demurrage and guarantee charges was made bona fide and on reasonable grounds, Mr Schaff relied on the fact that it was extraneous to the issue which had arisen about payment and conforming documents and whether the contract had determined .
However, it represented a claim arising under the same contract .
Further, it was a claim in relation to which Huyton had some reason to look askance at Cremer\'s attitude, particularly in the light of Cremer\'s apparent concession on 15th January that it would pay the demurrage in full; as I have indicated, that message was in fact probably an ill-phrased message prepared by Cremer\'s administration department with nothing more than the lien claims in mind, but Huyton had at the time no reason to know this .
Only on 30th January did Cremer raise any explicit query about demurrage, and on 1st February Cremer sought to support this by asserting that it had, subsequently to 15th January, itself received information that Huyton was charging Cremer an amount more than Huyton had actually had to pay under its own charterparty .
As far as Huyton was concerned this was simply untrue (and in fact, although Huyton did not actually know this, it was not even true that Cremer had received information to that effect) .
It seems to me that, against this background, it is understandable that Huyton should decide that it was not prepared to have anything more to do with the matter, if Cremer was going to pursue its points on demurrage and charges .
Huyton was giving up an arguable case that the goods were now Cremer\'s responsibility, and it seems to me that it was entitled, before so doing, to look at this other contractual dispute, raised with it late in the day, and to insist on its final resolution as part of an overall arrangement .
I come back to the question whether, assuming that Huyton did commit an actual and threatened breach of contract in refusing to pay the price, the agreement which was reached on 6th/7th February 1996 was induced, or Cremer\'s will was deflected, in any significant way by such breach - as opposed, for example, to Cremer\'s own perception of the merits and demerits of alternative courses open to it, influenced to a major extent by Cremer\'s mistaken perceptions about Huyton\'s conduct and intentions .
It seems to me, as I have said, that in so far as Cremer felt under pressure into entering into the agreement at all, a major element in the pressure which it perceived came from its own misconceptions about the position, for which Cremer itself and/or JGP and NBT were responsible .
I note that in  Barton , in addition to a number of incidents when Armstrong was undoubtedly responsible for threats to Barton\'s life and safety, there was an incident in which a man called Vojinovic informed Barton that he had been  hired by Armstrong to kill Barton, with which the majority in the Privy Council dealt as follows: \t"It is true that the judge was not satisfied that Vojinovic had been employed by Armstrong but if one man threatens another with unpleasant consequences if he does not act in a particular way, he must taken the risk that the impact of his threats may be accentuated by extraneous circumstances for which he is not in fact responsible. .
That statement was however related to extraneous circumstances, for which Barton had no more responsibility than Armstrong .
The misconceptions under which Cremer was labouring fall into a different category .
They are not Huyton\'s responsibility and were outside the risk that Huyton may be said to have taken .
I think that a court should take that into account, and in effect put such misconceptions aside, when considering the sufficiency and significance of any causal link between any illegitimate pressure applied by Huyton and Cremer\'s reaction .
Even assuming that a conclusion that Huyton was in breach or threatened breach of contract imposes on Huyton an initial factual onus to show that Cremer was not thereby caused to enter into the agreement of 6th/7th February 1996, it seems to me that, once Cremer\'s misconceptions are taken into account, the onus shifts to Cremer to show that it would still have entered into that agreement, aside from such misconceptions, simply on the basis of Huyton\'s breach or threatened breach of contract .
I do not think that this is established .
Taking the evidence which I have heard from Cremer\'s side at its face value, it is evident that Cremer felt very strongly about the demurrage and guarantee expenses .
But an important reason for Cremer\'s strength of feeling and for its actual decision to accede to Huyton\'s demands was Cremer\'s (erroneous) perception that Huyton was acting in bad faith towards it .
Once Cremer\'s misconceptions in this respect are put aside, it is far less clear that it would have acted as it did, or would have done so because of Huyton\'s breach or threatened breach rather than for reasons of choice .
It seems to me that Cremer would in likelihood have acted in one or other of the following two ways: (i) Either Cremer would simply have stuck to its stated position, refusing to enter any such agreement as that of 6th/7th February 1996, and would have pursued Huyton in arbitration for the price or damages measured by reference to the price, unless Huyton took a less rigid line .
On this basis, it was not any illegitimate pressure applied by Huyton, but Cremer\'s misconceptions, which led to the agreement now challenged .
(ii) Alternatively, if one assumes that Cremer would still have made the agreement which it did, it would have done so not because the course identified in (i) would not have been practical if Cremer could have been assured of its success, but because (a) Cremer would have had well in mind, in relation to an unusual and complex dispute, that it could be wrong and that, if this proved to be so, its position in respect of the goods and the market might by then really be prejudiced, and/or because (b) at the end of the day Cremer was neither commercially nor financially greatly affected either way by the deduction on account of demurrage and guarantee expenses on which Huyton was insisting .
Cremer had, as I have pointed out, very little exposure, having passed the amount of Huyton\'s demurrage claim, and more, to its own Romanian sellers, who were not aware - and remain to this day unaware - that it posed any problem .
On this hypothesis, although Cremer would not have entered into the agreement but for Huyton\'s actual or threatened breach of contract, it could not, in my judgment, show that the pressure applied by Huyton deflected its will or constituted a sufficiently significant cause of the agreement for it to be unconscionable for Huyton to rely on the agreement .
In the result Cremer\'s defences to this action fail on the basis that (a) by the agreement dated 6th/7th February 1996 Cremer agreed irrevocably to withdraw the demands which it now seeks to pursue in arbitration against Huyton and (b) this agreement binds Cremer .
It binds Cremer, because there was no illegitimate pressure, since Huyton never owed the price or its equivalent .
But, for the reasons I have given, even if there had been illegitimate pressure, Cremer\'s case on economic duress should still, I believe, have failed, on the ground that there was no sufficient deflection of will or no sufficiently significant causal link - between such pressure and the agreement - to make it unconscionable for Huyton to insist on the agreement .
Huyton is in these circumstances entitled to the relief sought .
October 21st 1998    reement binds Cremer .
It binds Cremer, because there was no illegitimate pressure, since Huyton never owed the price or its equivalent .
But, for the reasons I have given, even if there had been illegitimate pressure, Cremer\'s case on economic duress should still, I believe, have failed, on the ground that there was no sufficient deflection of will or no sufficiently significant causal link - between such pressure and the agreement - to make it unconscionable for Huyton to insist on the agreement .
Huyton is in these circumstances entitled to the relief sought .
October 21st 1998    .
b'MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  In this case the plaintiff, Dubai Aluminium Company Limited ("Dubal"), which operates an aluminium smelter in Dubai, sues among other defendants, Mr. Riyadh Al Alawi, the first defendant, in respect of his conduct as its sales manager during the years 1984 to 1993 .
\t\tDubal makes essentially three claims against Mr. Al Alawi .
The first is a claim for money had and received in the sum of $804,000 .
Mr. Al Alawi admits that he received this money but alleges that he gave consideration for it .
Dubal alleges that he gave no consideration and that the money was paid by a company then called Marc Rich & Co AG ("Richco") as part of a dishonest scheme hatched, inter alios, by Dubal\'s chief executive, Mr. Ian Livingstone, under which Richco pre-bought Dubal\'s aluminium at a discounted price and in return provided finance in a very large sum for the construction of a fourth potline, all on what are said to be disadvantageous terms to Dubal .
\t\tThe second claim is for damages for breach of Mr. Al Alawi\'s contract of employment in the sum of approximately $8.5 million representing the total of all such payments by Richco to various Dubal employees and others arising out of this allegedly dishonest transaction .
\t\tThe third claim is to recover secret commissions in an unquantified sum which it is alleged it must be inferred that Mr. Al Alawi obtained out of his employment with Dubal .
Among the grounds put forward for this inference is the allegation that during the years he was employed by Dubal, Mr. Al Alawi accumulated far more than he officially earned .
It is also alleged that he participated during this period in the making by Dubal of highly disadvantageous agreements, and that his fortune is the result of pay-offs for such involvement .
\t\tThe background to these claims, at any rate so far as they involve other parties such as Mr. Livingstone and Richco and their participation in the Richco Consultancy Agreement, may be found in  Dubai Aluminium Company Limited v Salam  (unreported, 17 July 1998) .
\t\tOn 28 July 1998 I made an Anton Piller order and a worldwide Mareva order against Mr. Al Alawi .
I am very shortly to hear Dubal\'s summons under RSC O14 for summary judgment against Mr. Al Alawi on the first claim for $804,000 and Mr. Al Alawi\'s summons to discharge the Mareva in whole or in part .
One of the grounds put forward by Mr. Al Alawi for such discharge is that in investigating his finances and assets Dubal has employed agents who have acted in contravention of the Data Protection Act 1984 or Swiss Banking laws, or have trespassed on Mr. Al Alawi\'s property and converted documents fetched out of his dustbins .
\t\tIn this connection, Mr. Al Alawi has sought discovery under RSC O24 r7 of the reports and other documents relating to such investigations as to his financial affairs by Page Associates, who are a firm of private investigators .
O24, r7 permits discovery of particular documents "at any time" .
It is accepted by Dubal that such documents are relevant and discoverable, but it is alleged that legal professional privilege attaches to them .
It is accepted by Mr. Al Alawi that prima facie such privilege would attach to them, but for the fact that they are part of or relevant to criminal or fraudulent acts or purposes or acts or purposes which are otherwise iniquitous .
\t\tIn this connection, Mr. Clive Freedman QC, who appears on behalf of Mr. Al Alawi invokes the doctrine, in itself well-established, that, in the words of Lord Sumner in  O\'Rourke v Derbishire  [1920] AC 581 at 613:   \t\t"No-one doubts that the claim for professional privilege does not apply to documents which have been brought into existence in the course of or in furtherance of a fraud to which both solicitor and client are parties .
To consult a solicitor about an intended course of action in order to be advised whether it is legitimate or not, or to lay before a solicitor the facts relating to a charge of fraud, actually made or anticipated, and make a clean breast of it for the object of being advised about the best way to meet it, is a very different thing from consulting him in order how to plan, execute or stifle an actual fraud. .
\tThis doctrine, or exception to the general rule of legal professional privilege, is exemplified in a number of decisions such as  R v Cox  (1884) 14 QBD 153,  Williams v Quebrada Railway Land & Copper Co  [1895] 2 Ch 751, and more recently in  Barclays Bank PLC v Eustace   [1995] 1 WLR 1238  .
\t\tIn  R v Cox  at 167, Stephen J said referring Lord Bougham\'s judgment in  Greenough v Gaskell  1 My & K 98, that \t\t"The reason on which the rule [of privilege] is said to rest cannot include the case of communications, criminal in themselves, or intended to further any criminal purpose for the protection of such communications cannot be possible otherwise than injurious to the interests of justice and to those of the administration of justice .
Nor do such communications fall within the terms of the rule .
A communication in furtherance of a criminal purpose does not \'come into the ordinary scope of professional employment\' .
A single illustration will make this plain .
It is part of the business of a solicitor to draw wills .
Suppose a person, personating someone else, instructs the solicitor to draw a will in the name of the supposed testator, executes it in the name of the supposed testator, gives the solicitor his fee, and takes away the will .
It would be monstrous to say that the solicitor was employed in the \'ordinary scope of professional employment. .
\tIn  Ventouris v Mountain  [1991] 1 WLR 607 at 611, Bingham LJ spoke of the rule of privilege existing "in the absence of iniquity" .
It would seem that the concept of iniquity covers "crime or fraud" ( R v Cox  at 165), the "criminal or unlawful" ( Bullivant v A-G for Victoria  [1901] AC 196 at 201) and "all forms of fraud and dishonesty such as fraudulent breach of trust, fraudulent conspiracy, trickery and sham contrivances" ( Crescent Farm (Sidcup) Sports Limited v Sterling Offices Limited  [1972] 2 Ch 553 at 565:  see  Barclays Bank v Eustace  at 1249CD per Schiemann LJ) .
In the latter case the court of appeal held that the effecting of transactions at an under value for the purpose of prejudicing the interests of a creditor (see section 423 of the Insolvency Act 1986) could be regarded as "iniquity" in this context, and that it was sufficient for the loss of privilege that there existed a "strong prima facie" case of such a purpose .
\t\tOn the other hand Schiemann LJ also cited Goff LJ in  Gamlen Chemical Co (UK) Limited v Rocham Limited  (unreported CA 7 December 1979) to the following effect: \t\t"The court must in every case, of course, be satisfied that what is prima facie proved really is dishonest, and not merely disreputable or a failure to maintain good ethical standards, and bear in mind that legal professional privilege is a necessary thing and is not likely too be overthrown, but on the other hand the interests of victims of fraud must not be overlooked .
Each case depends on its own facts. .
\tThus in  Crescent Farms  the doctrine was not extended to the tort of inducing breach of contract .
\t\tThe matters complained of in the present case, based upon Dubal\'s own evidence, and the very detailed information there found about Mr. Al Alawi\'s bank, credit card and telephone accounts, including the admission made by Dubal\'s solicitor, Mr. Cranston, in his third affidavit, that information in relation to certain of Mr. Al Alawi\'s accounts had been obtained by a sub-agent instructed by Page Associates making what Mr .
Page of that firm called "pretext calls" to the banks concerned, are as follows .
It is submitted that such information was by its nature confidential, and that access to it was unauthorised;  that other than the reference to such pretext calls, no explanation had been provided as to how it had been provided as to how it had been obtained, and that in the circumstances very strong inferences were to be drawn that the information had been obtained by means of false representation and impersonation, and that criminal offences had been committed, either in England under the Data Protection Act 1984 or in Switzerland under the banking secrecy laws there in force .
\t\tUnder section 5(6) of the Data Protection Act 1984 (as amended by the Criminal Justice & Public Order Act 1994)  \t\t"A person who procures a disclosure to him of personal data, the disclosure of which to him is in contravention of sub-section (2) or (3) above, knowing or having reason to believe that the disclosure constitutes such a contravention, shall be guilty of an offence. .
\tAs to Swiss law, Mr. Al Alawi relies on the evidence of a Swiss attorney, Ms Michelle Caratsch who cites article 47 of the Federal Law on Banks & Savings Institutions of 8 November 1934 to the following effect: \t\t"Whoever discloses a secret confided to him in his function as a member of a corporate body, an employee, a mandatory, a liquidator or a commissioner of a bank, as an observer of the Banking Commission, as a member of a corporate body or employee of a recognised auditing body, or discloses a secret to which he has become privy in this function, or whoever attempts to instigate such a breach of professional secrecy, is punishable with imprisonment up to six months or with a criminal fine of up to CHF50,000. .
\tShe goes on to state that the law also contains provisions making it a criminal offence punishable law for someone who does not himself owe a duty of secrecy to attempt to instigate a breach of article 47, and that the violation of the duty of secrecy is punishable whether it is committed intentionally, recklessly, or negligently .
\t\tThis evidence is not answered on behalf of Dubal .
Indeed, Mr. Pelling, who appears for Dubal, has not been concerned to answer Mr. Al Alawi\'s complaints on the facts, but rather has taken a stand in principle to which I will refer below .
In the circumstances, while I do not think that Mr. Pelling accepts the strictures made, and I am certainly in no position to find exactly what has been done or whether Dubal\'s solicitors or Page Associates themselves had foreknowledge of such matters, nevertheless I believe that I can find there to be a strong prima facie case of criminal or fraudulent conduct in the obtaining of such information concerning Mr. Al Alawi\'s accounts, and indeed in the light of Mr. Pelling\'s approach to his submissions I think I can proceed for present purposes on the assumption that such conduct has occurred .
In my judgment such conduct constitutes crime, fraud or iniquity within the scope of the doctrine discussed above .
\t\tIn saying this, I put on one side a further complaint by Mr. Al Alawi that his dustbins had been searched and documents obtained from them and copied before being put back, which conduct Mr. Freedman submits constitutes the torts of trespass and conversion and also falls within the scope of the doctrine .
In my judgment, however, such civil wrongs do not amount to crime, fraud or iniquity .
\t\tMr .
Pelling submits, however, that the conduct complained of cannot give rise to loss of legal professional privilege for the documents generated by it, even though such conduct is to be characterised as crime, fraud or iniquity .
He points out that no authority has extended the exception to privilege this far, and that all the cases which uphold it are concerned with instances where solicitors have become involved, whether innocently or not, with the planning or carrying out of iniquitous acts, such as a fraud or crime which have themselves become the subject matter of litigation .
Secondly, he submits that any extension of the exception to privilege would be inconsistent with the principle by which relevant evidence is admissible however it is come by .
Thirdly, he submits that the ramifications of the extension of an exception to privilege contended for was dangerously uncertain .
\t\tFor the purposes of his second submission, Mr. Pelling cited the well-known case of  Karuma v R   [1955] AC 197  .
There Goddard CJ said at 205: \t\t\t"In their Lordships\' opinion the test to be applied in considering whether evidence is admissible is whether it is relevant to the matters in issue .
If it is, it is admissible and the court is not concerned with how the evidence was obtained. .
\tLord Goddard then cited Crompton J in  R v Letham  (1861) Cox \tCriminal Cases 498 at 501: \t\t\t"It matters not how you get it, if you steal it even, it would be admissible. .
\t\tIn my judgment, it has to be recognised that there is a clash of principle and public interest in this area .
There is of course the very strong public interest in legal professional privilege for which I need not cite authority .
There is also the public interest, no less strong, in combating crime or fraud and in protecting the victims or potential victims of it .
Thirdly, there is the public interest, reflected in  Karuma , in trying cases on relevant evidence in the attempt to arrive at a true and just determination at trial .
How can these interests best be reconciled .
\t\tI acknowledge that no case has gone so far as Mr. Freedman now submits I should go in extending the exception to privilege on which he relies .
On the other hand, the exception itself is an established one, and I know of no case in which the current issue has arisen for decision .
That the problem of data protection is a modern one is reflected in the relatively recent date of the Data Protection Act, and in the fact that the ramifications of that legislation are only still more recently becoming clearer: see for instance the advice issued by the Bar Council in July 1997 headed "The Data Protection Act 1984 and the Bar" set out at page 121 of  Gee  on Mareva Injunctions and Anton Piller Relief, 1998, 4th edition .
\t\tIt seems to me that if investigative agents employed by solicitors for the purpose of litigation were permitted to breach the provisions of such statutes or to indulge in fraud or impersonation without any consequence at all for the conduct of litigation, then the courts would be going far to sanction such conduct .
Of course, there is always the sanction of prosecutions or civil suits, and those must always remain a primary sanction for any breach of the criminal or civil law .
But it seems to me that criminal or fraudulent conduct for the purposes of acquiring evidence in or for litigation cannot properly escape the consequence that any documents generated by or reporting on such conduct, and which are relevant to the issues in the case, are discoverable and fall outside the legitimate area of legal professional privilege .
It is not as though there are not legitimate avenues which can be sought with the aid of the court to investigate (for instance) banking documents .
That apparently is true in Switzerland as well .
In any event, the material being investigated is usually material which falls within the other party\'s possession or control, and which in all probability he will in due course be obliged to disclose himself .
In such circumstances, it does not seem to me to be too great an intrusion on legal professional privilege to require documentation such as is in question in this case should be disclosed .
Otherwise the position would be that the party employing the criminal or fraudulent agent would have it entirely within his own power to decide which of the criminally or fraudulently acquired information he was willing to rely on and disclose and which he was not .
Where such a party will be asking the court to make inferences from such material, it is only fair that such material should be seen as a whole .
\t\tIn my judgment the  Karuma  principle is consistent with this view, rather than against it .
That principle is concerned with vindicating the truth with the aid of relevant evidence, rather than excluding such evidence on the ground that it has been improperly come by .
That principle cannot be said to require privilege even where crime or fraud has been committed to obtain information .
\t\tUltimately, it seems to me that criminal or fraudulent conduct undertaken, for the purposes of litigation falls on the same side of the line as advising on or setting up criminal or fraudulent transactions yet to be undertaken as distinct from the entirely legitimate professional business of advising and assisting clients on their past conduct, however iniquitous .
In this connection the extracts that I have cited above from  R v Cox  at 167 appear to me to lend support to my conclusion .
I therefore think that the documents sought in the present case are in principle within the established exception .
\t\tAs to the extent of the disclosure required in such a case, that can always raise difficult questions, but the problem is not a new one .
It has to be solved on a case by case basis, and even on a document by document basis, in accordance with the principles laid down in  The Good Luck  [1992] 2 LLR 540, and  G. Capital Corporate Finance Group Ltd. v. Bankers Trust Co.  [1995] 1 WLR 529 .
See also  The Segheera  [1997] 1 LLR, 160 .
\t\tAlthough I have read the material in question, I have not re-read it in the light of that judgment, and there is still an opportunity for you, Mr. Pelling, for instance, to make submissions as to the extent of the disclosure which I have in principle said ought to be given .
For instance, I have in mind, speaking from memory, that there are some documents there which relate to the "dustbin" point rather than to the other point, on which I am prepared to give relief .
MR.\tPELLING:  Yes, and I think also there are references to other material where it is not obvious how it has been sourced, and which has not been the subject of specific evidence .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  I think you ought to have an opportunity to, as it were, consider my judgment and the documents in question, albeit a brief opportunity, because I suspect that Mr. Freedman will want to see the material which is properly disclosable in time for Monday\'s application .
MR.\tPELLING:  Yes .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  But if we can address the matter again by the end of the day so that I can make a decision, if not tonight at any rate by first thing tomorrow morning, I think that will answer all necessities .
MR.\tFREEDMAN:  Yes .
We would hope to have such documents as we were entitled to have under your Lordship\'s judgment some time tomorrow morning in order to be able to work on it in preparation for Monday .
MR.\tPELLING:  I would hope to be able to make some sensible comment on that perhaps after the luncheon adjournment .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  The next item on the agenda is your motion to commit .
MR.\tFREEDMAN:  My Lord, may I deal with the question of costs now .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  You can deal with it now .
MR.\tFREEDMAN:  My Lord, I respectfully submit this is an entirely self-contained application standing free of anything else .
There have been a significant amount of costs incurred in relation to it, and I would respectfully submit that those costs ought to be paid by the Plaintiff to the First Defendant .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  Yes .
Can you resist that, Mr. Pelling .
MR.\tFREEDMAN:  My Lord, I would also invite your Lord, in view of the self-contained nature of the application, and perhaps having regard to the nature of the conduct that was referred to, to order that the costs be paid forthwith .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  Yes .
MR.\tPELLING:  My Lord, I do not oppose an order as to costs .
I oppose the application that the costs be paid forthwith, and I also apply for leave to appeal .
\t\tDealing first with the taxed and paid forthwith point, my Lord, the point is a novel one .
There is no authority on it, and the matter has been dealt with as a matter of principle .
In those circumstances, in my submission, the matter is properly dealt with by an order for costs in the ordinary way .
\t\tSecondly, so far as leave to appeal is concerned, again the matter has been argued as a matter of principle .
The point is a novel one, and it is one of general importance .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  On the assumption that leave to appeal is either given by me or applied for if not given by me, how would the matter be proceeded with .
MR.\tPELLING:  My Lord, the answer to that lies very much in my having a little opportunity to discuss the matter with my solicitors as part and parcel of the review of the material over the luncheon adjournment .
It may be that, having reviewed the material, a pragmatic decision is taken .
\t\tOn the other hand, it may be, having reviewed the material, the view is take that the matter ought to be tested elsewhere, and if it is right that it should be tested, because it raises a novel point of general importance, then the pragmatic difficulties that arise as a result of it ought not to interfere with that determination .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  What does Mr. Freedman say .
MR.\tFREEDMAN:  My Lord, I do not accept that the fact that it has not arisen before makes it a matter of public importance .
It would be of public importance if there was some doubt about which way the decision should go, but, on my Lord\'s judgment, consistent with all principle, this falls within the very centre of the exception to legal professional privilege, and therefore there is not anything that requires or justifies a review, unless a different court takes a different view, but that is a matter for them and not for my Lord .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  I do not know if there is anything further you want to say .
MR.\tPELLING:  My Lord, no .
Your Lordship has the points .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  My view is that I cannot say that it is without interest in principle .
It is not an exercise of my discretion but, on the other hand, I think that, given the structure of the present state of this litigation, if there is to be any appeal it is one that you have to ask the Court of Appeal to advance, and you would have to do so immediately .
MR.\tPELLING:  My Lord, for practical reasons, I obviously cannot give much consideration to that before the luncheon adjournment .
Perhaps the way forward may be to review the position after lunch .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  Yes .
MR.\tPELLING:  Leaving me to make an appropriate application if necessary to the Court of Appeal tomorrow .
MR.\tGOURGEY:  My Lord, before we finish on the question of costs, since I think this was a hearing in chambers I can ask for a certificate for two Counsel .
MR.\tJUSTICE RIX:  Yes .
Can you oppose that .
No .
I will give you your costs, certificate for two Counsel, but I will not make an order that it be paid forthwith.  .
b'Mr .
Justice Lloyd, This winding-up petition is the latest stage in a long saga of litigation, mainly but not only in this jurisdiction, arising out of six contracts for the design, building, completion and delivery of refrigerated vessels (reefers) dated 11 September 1992 .
The Company, ("Latreefers") which was the buyer under the contracts, is a Liberian company which was incorporated only two days before it entered into the contracts .
Its ultimate parent company is the Latvian Shipping Co. ("Latco"), a state trading corporation .
The Petitioner, which was to design and construct the vessels, is Stocznia Gdanska S.A., a Polish shipbuilding yard ("the Yard").\r\n   The six contracts had an English choice of law clause .
As a result it is in this jurisdiction that the main battles between the parties have been fought out, hitherto in proceedings in the Commercial Court which have occupied the time of many of the judges of that court as well as of judges of the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords.\r\n   The total price payable under the six contracts would have been more than $170 million .
The price was payable by stages, with an initial 5% due shortly after the signing of the contracts .
This amount was paid, but nothing else has been paid by Latreefers.\r\n   The present position as regards the parties\' rights and obligations under the contracts can be seen from the speeches in the House of Lords in  Stocznia Gdanska S.A. v. Latvian Shipping Co   [1998] 1 WLR 574  .
For present purposes it can be summarised as follows.\r\n   Under contracts 1 and 2, the Yard is entitled to retain the 5% payment already made and is entitled to be paid the second instalment which became due after the laying of the keel for the vessels and the service of a keel-laying notice .
The second instalments under the two contracts amounted to just over $11 million .
Summary judgment was given under RSC Order 14 for this amount, with interest, in favour of the Yard .
That amount, together with interest which brings in up to over $15.8 million now, is the petition debt .
In addition the Yard claims damages for breach of contract .
Whether it will obtain judgment for any such damages depends, among other things, on the effect of Article 5.05 of the contracts, in the events which have happened .
These include the appropriation of the keels to two other new vessels, which were sold to another buyer in September 1994 for some $45 million, thus about $10 million short of the contract price .
Latreefers claims, as I will explain later, that the Yard has to bring into account, in the calculations required under Article 5.05, a further $9 or 10 million which, it says, the Yard ought to have obtained, but did not, on the sale of these vessels, pursuant to the express contractual duty to mitigate loss in Article 5.05, and that this would result in a sum being due from the Yard to Latreefers.\r\n   Under contracts 3 to 6, Latreefers claims to recover the 5% initial payments made to the Yard, on the basis of total failure of consideration .
In order to make good that claim, they must show that the Yard has not performed any part of the contractual duties in respect of which the payment is due: see Lord Goff of Chieveley at [1998] 1 W.L.R .
588 D.  Lord Lloyd of Berwick put the point in different terms but to the same effect 589H to 600B .
The Yard\'s claim to be entitled to the second instalment under each of these four contracts has been rejected .
However the Yard also claims damages on the basis of an anticipatory repudiation of these contracts, an argument which Lord Goff described as substantial, though he also applied the same adjective to the contract contentions which are open to Latreefers, including whether such a claim is compatible with the presence of Article 5.05 in the contracts, even if the Yard cannot take advantage of that Article, not having (validly) rescinded in the contracts under Article 5.05(1).\r\n   The Commercial Court litigation has been consolidated and repleaded as a result of the House of Lords orders .
It continues on its way .
I am told that discovery has taken place but that Latreefers has not yet inspected the documents disclosed by the Yard .
There are other defendants, including Latco, and other causes of action in that litigation, by way of an attempt on the part of the Yard to attach liability to someone worth suing.\r\n   I should mention that, although all six contracts were entered into on 11 September 1992, contracts 4 to 6 were conditional .
On 11 January 1993 Latco decided that the option to continue with these contracts should be exercised .
It was only after this that the initial 5% became due and was paid under these contracts .
At about the same time there were certain agreed variations of these contracts which, among other things, led to an increase in the contract price.\r\n   Latreefers \tLatreefers, as I say, was incorporated in Liberia .
It has an issued share capital of 100 bearer shares with no par value .
There is no indication of any money having been subscribed in respect of those shares .
It has three directors, who are residents of the Isle of Man, solicitors, and employees of or otherwise connected with a Manx company called Capco Trust I.O.M .
Ltd. ("Capco"), which provides services in the formation and administration of offshore companies .
Latreefers\' immediate parent is said to be another Liberian company called Latmar Holdings Corporation .
Latreefers appointed a number of persons as its attorneys, from time to time and for different purposes .
These included several persons based in Latvia, but also several based in London, including solicitors who were partners or employees of Watson Farley & Williams ("WFW"), persons who were officers or employees of Latmar Services Ltd. ("Latservices"), an English company with offices in London, and a Mr. Henriksen, a Norwegian ship broker operating through a Bermuda service company but with offices in England (as well as himself having a home here).\r\n   \tLatreefers\' sole commercial activities were the entry into the six contracts and the dealings that have taken place since then in relation to those contracts, including the resulting litigation .
It has a bank account with Hambros Bank in London which it opened in connection with the contracts .
The authorised signatories on this account include one of the directors of Latreefers, together with three individuals associated with Latservices .
There may be a small sum standing to the credit of that account .
It appears that substantial sums passed through the account .
Subject to that it does not seem that Latreefers has, or ever has had, any liquid assets .
It is not in doubt that the initial 5% payments were provided by Latco or other group companies.\r\n   \tAttempts were made to secure funding for the buyers\' obligations under the contracts, but these were unsuccessful, due no doubt at least in part to the decline in the reefer market .
By December 1993 Latreefers\' representative told the Yard that although Latreefers wanted the vessels there was no way that it could pay for them in accordance with the contracts .
In fact Latreefers was totally dependent on Latco to arrange funding, and Latco depended on securing loan facilities for the purpose.\r\n   Latreefers - its incorporation and management \tBy 9 September 1992 the negotiation of the proposed six contracts was well advanced .
It had been conducted by representatives of Latco, on the buyer\'s side, but it had been made clear that the actual buyer would be nominated in due course .
Negotiation on technical aspects, in particular the specification, seems to have taken place both at Gdansk and at Riga .
However it was also agreed that the contract would be governed by English law and that the final negotiation of the contract would take place in London.\r\n   \tOn, or perhaps shortly before, 8 September WFW took steps to have Latreefers set up, using a U.S. based incorporation agency to see to the incorporation .
Capco was used both to provide the directors and to see that the directors held a board meeting and passed a resolution authorising entry into the contracts and empowering any one of several named individuals to act on behalf of the company in executing the contracts .
On 8 September WFW faxed to Ms Potts of Capco a letter asking her to see to the passing of board resolutions in terms sent to her, and the execution of a power of  attorney also in terms supplied .
All these things were done on 9 September, together with the other necessary preliminaries .
It is clear from the documents in evidence (which include, with the leave of Mance J., documents obtained on discovery in the Commercial Court action) that the directors were accustomed to receive requests both from WFW and from Latservices for the execution of documents and the passing of board resolutions in terms which were often supplied by the person making the request, and they were accustomed to comply with these requests .
The evidence includes a statement by Ms Potts, apparently prepared in connection with related proceedings in France, which explains in some detail how the company was set up and operated, demonstrating the care that was taken to ensure that decisions on the part of Latreefers were taken either by the board or by someone duly authorised by the board, so as to emphasise the independent corporate personality of Latreefers .
Although the documents submitted to Capco will have been considered by one or more of the directors before being signed, I have no reason to doubt that it was a matter of course for the directors to do as they were requested.\r\n   \tIn her statement Ms Potts explains that the money required by Latreefers for the shipbuilding contracts would have had to come from banks and that she anticipated that, in the normal way, finance would have been arranged through the group, though the final decision whether to accept the terms of the loan facilities would have been taken by the board of Latreefers .
She says that negotiations were taking place with Hambros at the outset which would have involved security given by the group .
She also says that it was due to a downturn in the reefer market that no facilities were finalised and Latreefers was unable to obtain funds to pay the instalments due after the first .
Mr. Lax, of Latreefers\' solicitors Lawrence Graham, says that it had been intended that the money needed to pay the instalments would come from a loan by a German bank, Hamburgischer Landesbank, and that in the meantime funds would be provided from elsewhere in the group .
In fact, he says, hire earned by various Latvian vessels was paid into the Hambros account, opened in February 1993, and it was out of those sums that the initial 5% payments due on contracts 4 to 6 were paid in early March 1993 .
He however confirms that the negotiations with the German bank failed by September 1993, due to the decline in the reefer market .
It was at that stage that Latco engaged Mr. Henriksen to seek to renegotiate the contracts on behalf of Latreefers, which he attempted to do, but the Yard would not agree.\r\n   The issues \tThere is no doubt that Latreefers is unable to pay its debts as they fall due, or that the Yard is a creditor .
However issue is taken on the petition on two grounds .
First, it is said, the court has no jurisdiction to wind up Latreefers, as a foreign corporation, or rather, the conditions which the courts have laid down for exercising the statutory jurisdiction are not satisfied .
Secondly, it is contended that as a matter of discretion the court ought to adjourn the petition, either because Latreefers has a substantial cross-claim which would exceed the amount of the debt (cf .
Re Bayoil S.A.  unreported 31 July 1998) or because the petition is presented in order to stifle the defence of Latreefers\' position in the litigation, and in particular the pursuit of the counterclaim .
As an alternative, the Yard invites me to appoint provisional liquidators, if I am not willing to make an immediate winding-up order .
If it comes to that, Latreefers would not oppose it in principle, if the court is satisfied that there is jurisdiction to make a winding-up order, but would take issue with the width of the powers proposed for the provisional liquidators.\r\n   Jurisdiction to wind up Latreefers as a foreign company \tThe court\'s power to wind up a foreign company is conferred by s.221 of the Insolvency Act 1986 .
This is in entirely general terms .
The courts have, however, laid down constraints as regards the circumstances in which this jurisdiction will be exercised .
In  Banque des Marchands de Moscou (Koupetschesky) v. Kindersley  [1951] Ch 112, Sir Raymond Evershed MR. spoke, at 126, of "the circumstances .. which .. would make the case appropriate for the exercise by our court of its winding-up jurisdiction" .
He also said this, at p.125:\r\n   "As a matter of general principle, our courts would not assume, and Parliament should not be taken to have intended to confer, jurisdiction over matters which naturally and properly lie within the competence of the courts of other countries .
There must be assets here to administer and persons subject, or at least submitting, to the jurisdiction who are concerned or interested in the proper distribution of those assets. .
\tThe formulation of these principles has changed over time, and in particular the presence of assets in the jurisdiction is no longer regarded as essential .
Mr. Pascoe for Latreefers reserves for argument in a higher court the question whether the principles as laid down in recent first instance authority are correct, but he does not invite me to depart from them.\r\n   \tAs a result of the decisions of Megarry J in  Re Compania Merabello San Nicolas S.A.  [1973] Ch 75, Nourse J in  Re Eloc Electro-Optiek and Communicatie B.V.  [1982] Ch 43 and Peter Gibson J in  Re a Company (No .
359 of 1987)  [1988] Ch 210 (also know, less enigmatically, as  International Westminster Bank plc v. Okeanos Maritime Corporation , and to which I will refer as the  Okeanos case ) the statement of the relevant principles has evolved to the point at which they were summarised, most recently, by Knox J in  Re Real Estate Development Co  [1991] BCLC 210, at 217, as consisting of three core requirements, as follows:\r\n   (1)\tThere must be a sufficient connection with England and Wales which may, but does not necessarily have to, consist of assets within the jurisdiction .
(2)\tThere must be a reasonable possibility, if a winding-up order is made, of benefit to those applying for the winding-up order .
(3)\tOne or more persons interested in the distribution of assets of the company must be persons over whom the court can exercise a jurisdiction .
\tThis statement of principle was referred to by Peter Gibson LJ in  Re Titan International Inc.  [1998] 1 BCLC 102 at 107, but the facts and the nature of the case were different, so that this citation does not add to the authority of Knox J\'s statement .
Mr. Pascoe contends that none of these three requirements is satisfied on the facts of the present case.\r\n   Sufficient connection with England and Wales Mr. Moss Q.C .
for the Yard points to the following connections .
\tThe contracts were executed in England .
The whole purpose of Latreefers\' incorporation was to enter into the contracts, which have constituted its sole business .
They are governed by English law so that the parties to the contract including Latreefers, as well as those promoting it, must have anticipated that English courts would exercise jurisdiction over their dealings, as in fact they have, leading to an English judgment debt on which the petition is based .
Latreefers\' only known bank account is in England, and may contain a small credit balance .
The attorneys appointed by the board to act on behalf of Latreefers included English based individuals, not only solicitors at WFW but also persons associated with Latservices and also Mr. Henriksen .
Latservices itself, an English company member of the group, seems to have given the relevant directions as to the application of the money in the company\'s bank account, and Hambros were under instruction to send correspondence relating to the account to Latreefers at an address which was in fact that of Latservices.\r\n   \tMr .
Moss accepts that there are connections with other jurisdictions (though almost none with the jurisdiction of incorporation) but he says that this is not the question .
It seems to me that it may be relevant to consider what connections there may be with other jurisdictions in order to answer the rather ill-defined question as to the sufficiency of the connection with this jurisdiction .
If there is a clear and substantial connection with some other jurisdiction, it may be that more is needed by way of a connection with England and Wales for it to suffice as the foundation of the exercise of extra-territorial jurisdiction .
Thus, in the  Okeanos case  [1988] Ch 210 at 226-7 Peter Gibson J considered, in this context, whether there was any more appropriate jurisdiction to wind up the company .
However, in the present case, Mr. Moss submits that connections with other jurisdictions are no more substantial, and certainly the connection with the country of incorporation, Liberia, which on first principles might have the best claim to be the jurisdiction to govern insolvency, is almost non-existent .
Nothing has happened there apart from the bare formalities.\r\n   \tMr .
Pascoe submits that there are no assets here .
If there is a balance in the bank account, which is not clear, the company\'s deponents say it belongs to Latco or to another group company .
I do not accept that .
In the absence of evidence showing that there is no credit balance at all, in answer to the Yard\'s evidence suggesting a small credit balance, I proceed on the basis that there is one, albeit small .
I accept that it is likely to have resulted from payment into the account by other group companies, but the correct legal analysis of that is just as likely, if not more so, to be a loan to Latreefers, leaving Latreefers the owner of the credit balance and Latco or some other group company a creditor for the amount lent .
There is certainly no evidence of any other basis of payment.\r\n   \tHe points out that the contracts are between a Liberian buyer and a Polish shipbuilder, that much or most of the negotiation took place in Poland and Latvia, that the obligations under the contract, both of the Yard to design, build and deliver, and of Latreefers to pay, were to be performed in Poland, and that the management of the company, in terms of the operations of the board, took place in the Isle of Man.\r\n   \tIn my judgment, the connecting factors with England and Wales, while not so strong as in the case before Peter Gibson J, are sufficient as a basis for assuming jurisdiction over this foreign corporation, and no other jurisdiction is more appropriate to wind up the company.\r\n   Reasonable possibility of benefit if the company is wound up \tMr .
Moss argues that, if there is even only $100 worth of assets in this country, that is sufficient to found the jurisdiction, even on the principles applied before the recent developments .
But he goes further and relies principally on the contention that, in a liquidation, there is a reasonable prospect that the liquidator could successfully mount a claim based on fraudulent trading, under s.213, or wrongful trading, based on s.214, or on misfeasance, and that such a claim would lie against not only the nominal directors in the Isle of Man but also possibly against Latco or other companies in the Latco group as shadow directors, being a person or persons in accordance with whose directors or instructions the directors of the company are accustomed to act: see Insolvency Act 1986 s.251 .
Thereby there would or might come to be assets in the liquidation available for distribution to creditors.\r\n   \tMr .
Pascoe submitted that such a claim does not, in law, satisfy this second requirements for jurisdiction .
I disagree .
Both in principle and as a matter of precedent, it seems to me to suffice .
Such a claim was the basis for the exercise of the jurisdiction by Peter Gibson J. in the  Okeanos case  .
In  Re Compania Merabello  the benefit that would accrue was that of entitling the petitioning creditor to claim against the company\'s insurers under the Third Parties (Rights against Insurers) Act 1930 .
In that case, therefore, the benefit was derived from an asset of the company, albeit that it would be diverted in favour of a particular creditor .
In  Re Eloc  the benefit was not to be derived from the company\'s assets at all .
It was that the making of a winding-up order would entitle the petitioning creditors, former employees in England of the Dutch company, to claim redundancy compensation from public funds which they could not do if the company were not wound up .
It seems to me that Mr. Pascoe was taking issue with the formulation of the test itself in this submission .
I do not accept it .
I note also that, in  Bell Group Finance (Pty) Ltd. v. Bell Group Holdings Ltd  [1996] 1 BCLC 304, admittedly a case concerning an English company, but one where it was argued that there was no point in making an order since there were no available assets and no other reasonable possibility of benefit for the petitioning creditors, because any assets would be swallowed up by the secured creditors, Chadwick J used cases such as  Re Compania Merabello, Re Eloc  and the  Okeanos case  by way of analogy to justify making a winding-up order in order to allow an investigation of whether there were grounds for attacking the bank\'s security.\r\n   \tNext Mr. Pascoe submitted that the prospect of a successful claim on any of these bases against any Defendant was purely speculative .
He pointed out that the contracts were dated 11 September, only 2 days after the incorporation of the company, and invited me to regard as fanciful the suggestion that the directors might be found to be trading fraudulently as early as that in the history of the company\'s affairs, even accepting that fraudulently includes a degree of recklessness which can be characterised as dishonest .
He said the same about the wrongful trading claim, that is, that the directors knew or ought to have concluded, as early as that date, that there was no reasonable likelihood that the company would avoid going into an insolvent liquidation.\r\n   \tMr .
Moss pointed out that the directors entered into these six contracts at a date when they had no funds, no credit facilities, not even an offer, still less an assurance of receiving the necessary funding in any way .
He says they were reckless as to whether creditors would ever be paid .
He suggests that it was a purely speculative operation, which could be characterised as a one way bet: if the reefer market improved the contracts would be worthwhile and it would be possible to secure funding to pay for the work and take delivery of the ships, whereas if it did not, all that was at risk was a shell of a Liberian company, with no residual risks for the rest of the group .
He submitted that, if this was the attitude, it was an abuse of the principle of limited liability, of just the kind that sections 213 and 214 are designed to catch .
He also submitted that, even if neither of these statutory liabilities could be made out, the directors might equally be liable for misfeasance, for landing the company in a position in which it has vast liabilities and no means of satisfying them .
He pointed out that, even though the contracts were dated 11 September, so that this is the first date at which the state of mind of the directors has to be considered, a second date is also relevant to contracts 4 to 6, namely the date, apparently in January 1993, when Latreefers decided to make these contracts unconditional .
The directors\' state of mind would need to be considered at that date as well.\r\n   \tIt seems to me that there is at the very least a possible claim which merits investigation in these respects .
At first sight, those liable would be limited to the three Isle of Man de jure directors .
I do not know whether they would be worth suing .
There may be some insurance backing on the part of Capco, or for themselves, which would allow a useful degree of recovery .
However Mr. Moss\' main contention is that Latco or others would be liable as well as shadow directors .
I say no more, at this stage, than that there seems to me to be an adequate basis for supposing that there may be claims worth investigating against Latco and others, as well as against the de jure directors.\r\n   \tMr .
Moss\' fall-back position was that, if I had any doubt as to whether this requirement was satisfied, I should at least appoint a provisional liquidator who could investigate the position .
I will come to that matter later, and will then revert to this point in that context.\r\n   Persons interested in the distribution of assets subject to the court\'s jurisdiction \tThe third requirement is in some ways puzzling, not as regards the principle, but in practice .
The petitioning creditor will always have invoked the jurisdiction and therefore be subject to it in some sense .
The fact that the petitioning creditor is foreign, and non-resident, is not a sufficient bar, but the fact that he has presented a petition cannot be a sufficient qualification in itself .
It seems to me, in the present case, that the petitioning creditor, albeit foreign and having no business presence in England, should be regarded as having submitted to the court\'s jurisdiction and thus as being a person over whom the court can exercise jurisdiction .
The creditor has the benefit of an English judgment debt, which involved submission to the jurisdiction, and it is still the Plaintiff in the ongoing Commercial Court proceedings, so the submission to the jurisdiction is continuing.\r\n   Discretionary factors -  Re Bayoil S.A. \tMr .
Pascoe also says that the petition should be adjourned while Latreefers\' counterclaim in the Commercial Court action is fought out .
He relies on the recent, and so far unreported, decision of the Court of Appeal in  Re Bayoil S.A.  on 31 July 1998 .
This time it was for Mr. Moss to reserve the possibility of arguing in a higher court that the decision was wrong .
He also suggested that, by reference to  Re Claybridge Shipping Co SA  [1997] 1 BCLC 572, the practice stated in  Re Bayoil  should not be regarded as applying to a case of this kind .
Re Bayoil  was a case in which the petitioner had a clear debt, in the form of an interim award, for freight, and a cross-claim which substantially exceeded the debt, and which it was pursuing in the continuing arbitration .
Nourse LJ held that, where the debt was admitted or established, but there was a cross-claim, the petition should be dismissed, or possibly adjourned, so long as, first, the cross-claim is genuine and serious, or in other words, is one of substance, secondly it must be one which the company has been unable to litigate, and thirdly it must be in an amount exceeding the petitioner\'s debt .
That debt is of a principal sum of just over $11 million, and is now over $15.8 million with accrued interest.\r\n   \tIn my judgment those conditions are not all satisfied .
In order to explain why I must summarise the cross-claims which Latreefers asserts in the Commercial Court .
There are two, or perhaps three, aspects .
The first is the attempt to recover the 5% payments under contracts 3 to 6 for total failure of consideration (Defence and Counterclaim paragraph 26) .
This relates to some $5.7 million, with interest which is said to bring it up to about $8 million .
The second is the claim that the Yard failed in its duty to mitigate, by selling the vessels which it actually constructed for too little (Defence and Counterclaim paragraphs 27 and 28) .
In the pleading this is put variously as $13.5 million, in paragraph 27(5), $13 million, in paragraph (3) of the prayer for relief, and at least $10 million, in paragraph 28 .
The highest Mr. Pascoe put it was $9 million .
The third cross claim also relates to the accounting process under Article 5.05 .
I have no reliable indication of its amount.\r\n   \tThe claim to recover the 5% payment depends on showing that the Yard has not performed any part of the contractual duties in respect of which the payment is due .
The initial instalment is due under clause 5.02(a) upon notice that the Yard has established a Bank guarantee in agreed terms assuring Latreefers of repayment of sums which might fall to be repaid .
The guarantee had been established .
That in itself might be regarded as the Yard embarking on performance of the contract, since the guarantee will undoubtedly have cost it money to establish .
However the evidence refers also to other things done under the contracts, in particular the ordering of the engines for each contract .
Article 2.06 of the contract specifies the engine and its maker .
Mr. Pascoe submitted that merely ordering the engine was not performing the contract but no more than preparing to perform it .
That seems to me to be the same fallacy as underlay the arguments rejected by the House of Lords on the same point .
I note references by Lord Goff to ordering machinery (see [1998] 1 W.L.R .
at 588H) .
This reinforces me in the view that it would be a sufficient answer for the Yard to show that it had ordered the engines required under contracts 3 to 6 .
That is deposed to, and while of course it could be contested as a matter of fact, it seems to me that Latreefers would need to show some evidential basis on which it could be disputed in order to establish, for the purposes of the proceedings before me, that this cross-claim is one of substance .
That they have not attempted.\r\n   \tThe second claim is based on the Yard having sold the new vessels for too low a price .
The calculation of the claim in paragraph 27(5) is in part false, since it proceeds on the assumption, contrary to the fact, that the Yard has received the second instalment of the price .
If that point is ignored, the paragraph is left with an assertion that there should be a credit, under Article 5.05, of at least $10 million .
Paragraph 28 is to the same effect, as regards amount .
There is no real evidence before me as to the basis for this claim .
Mr. Pascoe did however show me an affidavit of Mr. Fox on behalf of the Yard, sworn on 29 March 1994 in support of an application for leave to serve the proceedings out of the jurisdiction .
At paragraph 11.11 Mr. Fox says:\r\n   "I should add that the Plaintiff does not accept the valuation of each vessel at US$20 million which Latco obtained from RS Platou .
The Plaintiff considers that they are worth a minimum of US$27 million second hand. .
On that basis Mr. Pascoe submitted that the Yard\'s own figure suggested a value of $54 million, whereas they were sold for $45 million .
That he said showed a basis for a claim of $9 million .
\tAs to that, a first comment is that, given that the reefer market had been declining, it would not be surprising if a valuation in March was no longer correct in September .
The second is that, even on these figures, the cross-claim is not shown to be worth more than $9 million .
At that figure it does not exceed the debt, and the other cross-claim cannot be used to cover the difference since I have held that it is not sufficiently established itself.\r\n   \tMr .
Pascoe suggested that there was also a further cross-claim, for the repayment of sums following the application of the accounting process required by Article 5.05, in which he submitted that it would be shown that the Yard had been overpaid already (or rather, it would have been overpaid if it had received the keel-laying instalments) .
All I need say about this further claim is that there was no evidence to back it up .
I therefore disregard it.\r\n   \tMr .
Pascoe pointed out that these cross-claims are asserted in the Counterclaim and have not been the subject of an application to strike them out .
That is bedside the point .
To bring the  Bayoil  practice into play he has to show, on at least a prima facie basis, the substance of the cross-claims, which involves more than just pleading them .
In my judgment he has failed in this respect .
His argument suffers also from a forensic difficulty, in that while the pleading says that further details cannot be given until after discovery of the amount which ought to be allowed in favour of Latreefers, Mr. Moss tells me that the discovery was given by the Yard in October and its documents have not yet been inspected on behalf of Latreefers.\r\n   \tAccordingly, I reject the argument that I ought to adjourn the petition because of the existence and pendency of the cross-claims in the Commercial Court proceedings .
I am not, of course, deciding that the cross-claim for the recovery of the first instalments under contracts 3 to 6 is unarguable, nor that the cross-claim for failure to mitigate is invalid or, if valid, is necessarily limited to a maximum of $9 million .
Those issues remain outstanding in the Commercial Court litigation .
My decision is only that these cross-claims have not been shown before me to have enough in substance and quantum to justify adjournment of the petition on the basis of  Re Bayoil S.A.   \tI need not therefore say anything about the further factor Mr. Moss relied on, namely the Yard\'s remaining claim for damages, on which a figure of some $33 million has already been placed, which he submitted would have to be brought into the account to see whether there was a sufficient prospect that the cross-claim would result in extinguishing the petition debt .
Nor need I deal with his argument that, by analogy with  Re Claybridge Shipping , an exception should be recognised to the practice enunciated in  Re Bayoil S.A. , where winding-up in this jurisdiction is the only practicable remedy.\r\n   Discretionary factors - stifling the counterclaim \tNext, Mr. Pascoe submitted that I ought to adjourn the petition, in the exercise of my undoubted discretion, since otherwise Latreefers\' defence to the Commercial Court litigation, and its pursuit of its counterclaim, would be stifled because the liquidator would be appointed by the Yard, as the largest, even if not the only, creditor and would be likely to pay undue respect to its views .
Even though the cross-claim has not been shown in these proceedings arguably to exceed the debt, he submitted that it will still be in the interests of Latreefers to resist the Yard\'s action in order that the ultimate liability as between the parties is resolved at as low a figure in favour of the Yard as possible .
He pointed out that Latreefers is not carrying on any business, and that, for what it may be worth, the commencement date of any eventual winding-up will not be deferred because s.127 will apply as from the presentation of the petition.\r\n   \tMr .
Moss submitted that, where a company is clearly insolvent (as I must assume Latreefers is, on the evidence before me) the persons whose interests ought to be considered are its creditors, rather than its shareholders, and that the proposition that the proceedings should continue to be defended (as they are now) at the expense of, and no doubt at the behest of, Latco wrongly puts the interests of the shareholder above that of creditors .
Latco is of course itself a party to the proceedings .
Although for the purposes of the English courts the argument that Latco was a party to the contracts has been decided against the Yard, and has not been appealed, nevertheless liability is sought to be established against Latco, and others including Latservices and Mr. Henriksen, on the basis of unlawful inducement of breach of contract or interference with contractual relations .
Latco therefore has its own reasons for seeking to reduce the liability of Latreefers even though it may be unlikely to receive anything from Latreefers as a member.\r\n   \tIf a liquidator were appointed, he would have two particular tasks .
One would be to form a view as to whether and if so how Latreefers should continue to resist the Commercial Court proceedings .
In that respect Latco would wish to encourage him to resist, and might well offer the continuance of the funding which it is now providing for the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of Latreefers .
The second would be to investigate whether there is some worthwhile prospect of a claim against Latco or others such as Mr. Moss submits would be available, whether under s.213 or s.214 or by way of misfeasance .
In that respect the liquidator would no doubt look for funding to the Yard .
In each case, however, the task would be undertaken by an independent insolvency practitioner, as an officer of the court, able to apply what may be a greater degree of objectivity to the task then can either of the warring parties in the present litigation .
Odd as it may be to have to undertake two investigations, with opposite targets, so to speak, and having to look for each to the other party for funding, it seems to me that this is something which would not be foreign to an experienced insolvency practitioner, and would not pose insuperable problems.\r\n   \tI therefore do not consider that the position of Latreefers in the Commercial Court proceedings is a sufficient reason for adjourning the petition and declining to make a winding-up order immediately in respect of a company which, on the evidence before me, has to be seen as plainly insolvent.\r\n   Provisional liquidator \tIn the  Okeanos  case [1988] Ch 210 the application which Peter Gibson J heard and acceded to was for the appointment of a provisional liquidator, with a view to the investigation of possible claims under section 213 or 214 .
That was a case where the company did have an asset, a ship, which it might have tried to sell, and the appointment would control that exercise as well .
That element does not exist here, but a provisional liquidator would be able, funded by the Yard, to investigate possible claims under sections 213 and 214 or otherwise as well as the merits of the company\'s position in the Commercial Court for proceedings, for which funding would no doubt be sought from Latco.\r\n   \tMr .
Pascoe would not object to such an appointment if the provisional liquidator\'s powers were limited to the investigation, leaving the Commercial Court proceedings to be dealt with by the directors .
I would not be prepared to make an appointment on terms such as those .
There might have to be special terms about the appointment having regard to the two operations, involving conflicting opposed interests, which would have to be examined and undertaken .
But that is something which insolvency practitioners can and do cope with .
I can see no basis for making an appointment in respect of only part of the company\'s operations.\r\n   \tIf it is not right to make an immediate winding-up order, then I can see every reason to appoint a provisional liquidator .
The only problem I have identified as regards a winding-up order is whether there is enough of a possibility of benefit to the creditors from the making of the order .
A provisional liquidator would be able to investigate the position and report to the court, so that the decision whether or not to wind the company up would be made on a more fully informed basis.\r\n   Conclusion \tAccordingly the question whether to make a winding-up order turns on whether it is shown that there is sufficient prospect of a possibility of benefit for creditors .
I am satisfied that there is a sufficient connection with England and Wales and that the petitioning creditor should be regarded as someone who has submitted itself to the jurisdiction, for the purposes of the third core requirement .
I am also satisfied that neither the practice stated in  Re Bayoil S.A.  nor the other discretionary factors relied on by Mr. Pascoe should lead me not to make a winding up order in relation to this plainly insolvency company if I am otherwise disposed to do so.\r\n   \tIt seems to me that the evidence may already show enough to allow me to conclude that there is a reasonable possibility of benefit to the petitioning creditor if a winding-up order is made .
However the position is not clear and it seems to me better to regard it as a case which falls for investigation and therefore justifies the appointment of provisional liquidators, following the example of Peter Gibson J in the  Okeanos  case .
I will hear any submissions as to the details of the appointment, including the directions to be given to, and powers conferred on, the provisional liquidators, but that appointment will not be limited so as to exclude the conduct of the Commercial Court litigation.\r\n    .
b'Mr .
Justice Longmore  .
DRY DOCK 7  This is a case about the insurance of a floating dry dock; the dock was built as long ago as 1916 and spent most of its life in Sweden but was bought by the Southampton company of Kirkaldy and Sons Ltd {"Kirkaldy") in 1997 .
Kirkaldy were a company whose main business was blasting and painting of vessels; they wished to expand their business in south-west England by purchasing their own dry dock and setting it up in Portland, Dorset in competition with ship repair and maintenance companies in Southampton .
They obtained insurance for 12 months at Lloyd\'s with the Coffey and Cox Syndicates on 22 July 1997 .
It was agreed the risk would incept on 28 July while the dock was expected to be still in Sweden .
On 12 August 1997 the dry dock began its voyage under tow and it arrived in Portland on 21 August 1997 .
Thereafter work was carried out to prepare the dry dock for her final mooring place at Portland .
There was stormy weather over the week-end of 8-9 November 1997 but that blew itself out; on the morning of 10 November 1997 mariners in a neighbouring vessel heard a loud noise .
That was the noise of one of the dry dock\'s cranes falling from the top deck on to the pontoon deck .
Thereafter the dock sunk at her moorings and could not be raised even by the best efforts of salvors .
She became a total loss and the port authority required the wreck to be removed .
The dry dock was insured against both total loss with a valuation of \xc2\xa3600,000 and for wreck removal; in order to recover for a total loss Kirkaldy (to whom I shall now refer as "the Owners") had to prove a loss by perils insured against (such as peril of the seas) whereas to recover the expenses incurred by virtue of the removal of the wreck, they only had to show an accident or occurrence during the period of insurance which gave rise to "10.2 .
4.   expenses of the removal of the wreck of the Vessel from any place .... occupied by the Assured. .
Owners began by suing underwriters for both total loss and wreck removal expenses .
But on the 7th day of the trial (25 January 1999) they accepted that they could not prove a loss by perils of the seas or any other peril insured against .
The claim as finally formulated in final speeches was, therefore, solely a claim for wreck removal expenses in the sum of \xc2\xa31,000,000, the limit of liability for that particular cover provided in the insurance .
The risk was placed by Lloyd\'s brokers Swire Blanch pursuant to the terms of a permanent open cover for port risks agreed between their predecessors and the underwriters in January 1997 .
The open cover was not initially used, but, when the first business (which was Dry Dock 7) became available, it was agreed it would incept on 28 July 1997 .
The open cover had a limit of \xc2\xa3500,000 on any one vessel, so Swire Blanch  had to present this declaration for signature to both syndicates .
When it  was scratched on 22 July 1997 by Mr. Walker of the Coffey Syndicate  and Mr.  Shrimpton of the Cox Syndicate it was contemplated that the  vessel would be towed first to Southampton for work to be done on her  and later to Portland .
In fact plans changed with the result that the vessel  was towed direct from Sweden to Portland but that was only decided  after 22 July 1997 .
The clause of the declaration on which underwriters  have relied for their defence in this action reads:- "Towage of vessel to be undertaken by TSA Tugs Ltd. Towage approval survey - applies to both tows - and condition survey to be performed by Surveyor Peter Curtiss and all recommendations complied with prior to sailing. .
[The part between the parenthetical dashes was added by Mr. Walker in his pen; the rest of the clause was in type] Underwriters defence to the claim is that Mr. Peter Curtis (to give him his accurate spelling) performed neither a towage survey nor a condition survey and that the contract of insurance came to an end at latest when the vessel sailed .
Alternatively they say that Owners failed to disclose that the vessel was unseaworthy at the time of the contract and that they justifiably avoided the contract of insurance .
Witnesses .
I heard evidence of fact on behalf of the Plaintiffs from Mr. David Figgins, the managing director of and majority shareholder in Kirkaldy, the owning company, from two gentlemen whose services he used for the purpose of deciding whether to buy the Dry Dock, Mr. Alan Vincent and Mr. David Bailey .
Mr. Vincent was a friend and Mr. Bailey, an employee, was a marine electrical engineer and more knowledgeable than Mr. Figgins about technical matters to do with ships and docks .
I also heard from Mr. Nother who rode on the tow between Sweden and Portland and from Mr. Curtis, the surveyor nominated in the insurance contract .
For the defence, I heard from Mr. Walker and Mr. Shrimpton, and also Mr. Tate, Mr. Walker\'s deputy on the underwriting box .
There was little dispute about the essential facts .
I read certain statements under the Civil Evidence Act .
I had marine engineering expert evidence from Mr. Hart of Aquarius International Consultants for the Plaintiff and Mr. Waite of the Salvage association for the Defendants; I also heard expert underwriting evidence from Mr. Richard Outhwaite and Mr Geoffrey Luben .
The Facts  .
Once Mr. Figgins decided he would like his company to acquire a dry dock, he went to look at two available dry docks, one in Copenhagen and the other (the one he eventually bought) at Falkenburg near Gothenburg in Sweden .
He took with him Mr. Bob Middle and Mr. Vincent and they decided that the dock at Falkenburg was much the better value .
They visited Falkenburg on 6 March 1997 and spent much of the day looking over the dock .
It was made clear by Falkvarv AB, the Sellers, that the dock would have to be purchased on an "as is" basis and that the buyers would have to conduct their own inspection of the vessel and decide according to their own judgment whether it was suitable for their purposes .
They together examined a number of parts of the dock as follows:- (1)       The surface of the pontoon deck, including the keel blocks; (2)       The inner wing walls of the dock, above the pontoon deck; (3)       The port outer wing wall from the quayside; (4)       The  starboard   outer  wing   wall   by   looking   down  from  the companionways; (5)       The upper deck on each wing wall; (6)       The safety deck (or, as it was sometimes called, the machinery deck) on each wing wall; (7)       The internal wing walls of tank Nos .
3 fore and aft, on port side down to a level about 5 feet above the pontoon deck; (8)       The cranes which were operated for their benefit; (9)       The pipework, the ballast valves and their control arms .
The inspection was both visual and with hammer testing .
They did not see inside the tanks under the pontoon deck or the starboard wing tanks, nor any of the port wing tanks apart from Nos .
3 fore and aft .
As a result of this inspection, they became aware that there was some thinning or wastage of steel and some corrosion, particularly in and around the wind and water line .
They concluded, however, that the dock was essentially sound in areas which they had seen and which they considered important .
There were some holes in the safety deck but not  (through Inbro Citygate Insurance Brokers Ltd.) to procure insurance with  the   Royal   Insurance   group   did   not   bear  fruit;   he  then   obtained   an  introduction (through personnel at TSA Tugs Ltd.) to Mr. Richard Ellis of  Everard    Insurance    Brokers    Ltd.    ("Everards") .
Everards   were    not  themselves  Lloyd\'s   Brokers  but  knew  that   Mr.   Adrian  Walker  of  the  Coffey Syndicate was prepared to write dry dock risks .
They accordingly  instructed the firm of Swire Blanch Ltd. to obtain quotes and Mr. Jon  Suckling of that firm obtained two quotes, one from the Coffey Syndicate  which   required   surveys  to  take   place   but   not   as   a   pre-condition   to  inception  of  the  risk  and  one  from   another  syndicate  which  required  surveys to take place before the risk could incept at all .
On 16th July Mr.  Figgins  indicated  that  he  preferred  the  Coffey  Syndicate\'s  quote  and  Richard   Ellis   then   sought   to   find    a   surveyor   to   satisfy   insurers\'  requirements .
It was he who heard about Peter Curtis (probably from Mr.  Middle) .
Mr.  Ellis then  telephoned  Mr.   Curtis  and  asked  if he  would  inspect the dock to approve it for towage to England .
Mr. Curtis agreed  and after some further discussion with insurers (via Mr. Suckling) Mr.  Curtis  was  written  into  the  contract  of  insurance  as  the  nominated  surveyor .
Mr. Ellis then faxed Mr. Curtis on 18 July 1997 in these terms:- Further to our telephone conversation on the afternoon of 16th July, I confirm that I have been instructed by Mr. David Figgins, Managing Director of J Kirkaldy & Sons, to place insurance on the above and that you are his nominated Surveyor to carry out the Underwriters required Towage Approval Survey and Condition Survey .
Any recommendations you make must be complied with prior to sailing .
We are advised that the inception date of the cover will be 28th July and we understand that it is the Owners intention for the survey to be carried out around  that date  with  any  work  required  being  carried  out within the following  7 days .
Thereafter the vessel  will sail weather permitting .
The  slip   was  then  scratched   on   22  July   1997   and  the   contract  of insurance with the term I have already quoted was then in place with the risk incepting on 28th July .
Mr. Curtis flew out to Falkenburg with Mr. David Bailey on 28 July and inspected the dock on 29 July and for a short while on 30 July before flying home .
There was a ship ("MADZY") on the dock when he arrived which left the dock on the evening of 29th July .
They were met by the dock manager Mr. Johansen who gave them a general tour and then left them to their own devices .
Mr Curtis then began his inspection; sometimes Mr. Bailey was with him while at other times Mr. Bailey was looking round by himself .
Mr. Curtis could not satisfactorily examine the pontoon deck due to the presence of the MADZY but inspected the following parts of the dock:- (1)     The inner wing walls port and starboard; this was done from the pontoon deck; (2)     The port outer wing walls; this was done from the quayside .
The starboard outer wing wall was not inspected since it was on the seaward side; (3)     Some of the port side internal wing tanks down to the internal water line; the tanks he inspected were the port side tanks Nos .
3 fore and aft .
The tanks had a walkway which he utilised .
in areas which caused them alarm .
Mr. Vincent noted an area of heavy corrosion in the after part of the vessel but did not regard that as of fundamental concern .
Someone at Falkenburg told Mr. Figgins and Mr. Vincent that the dock had a leak and that the dock required pumping every 2 days or so, for about 10-15 minutes .
That did not cause them any surprise in a structure that was already 80 years old .
Neither of them asked the Sellers what the source of the leak was but Mr. Vincent thought it could be attributed to a leaking gland which he had noticed on one of the pump valves .
They also learned that the Sellers had had no programme of planned maintenance - there was no requirement that the dock be classed and it was not classed in fact - but repaired as and when they found it to be necessary, Mr. Figgins was satisfied that the dock would serve his purposes and on 27 March 1 997 he made a contract to buy it "as is" at Falkvarv for the sum of \xc2\xa3180,000 .
He then set about arranging for it to be towed to England and for it to be covered by insurance .
On 9th July a contract with TSA Tugs Ltd. was made for towage of the dock from Falkenburg to Portland by the tug TOWING WIZARD .
As far as insurance was concerned, Mr. Figgins relied heavily on Mr. Tony Symons of Paul Jones Insurance Services Ltd.   His initial efforts From  this  walkway  he  climbed  out towards the  walls,   using frames or cross-bracings; he also descended ladders alongside the pump shafts down to within about 2 feet of the water in the bottom tanks .
Mr. Curtis asked Mr. Johansen whether the dock needed to be pumped and was told that pumping was required for 15 minutes or so every other day .
He observed that the pumps were not in use during the day he inspected  the vessel  or that part  of the  following  day  when  he  was present .
He assumed, therefore, that the leak was not serious and that there was nothing which affected the seaworthiness of the dock .
Mr. Curtis did not examine (1)          the bottom tanks underneath the pontoon deck; (2)          the starboard wing tanks; (3)          the port side wing tanks apart from No .
3 fore and aft where, however, the ballast pipes were to be found; (4)         the cranes, although they were being used while he was conducting his inspection .
He observed some localised wastage of steelwork in the shell plates and the frames .
Overall he was satisfied with what he found and did not think it necessary to examine tanks other than those he inspected .
He did make certain recommendations which are set out in his written evidence to the court (B/102-3); in particular he required doubler plates to be fitted in way of the wind and water line on the inner wing walls wherever he had made chalk marks .
He then returned from Sweden to the United Kingdom on 30 July 1 997 together with Mr. Bailey .
He revisited the dock on 10 August 1997 to ensure that his recommendations had been complied and to approve the tug and its towing equipment .
He was satisfied that his recommendations had been complied with and he returned to the United Kingdom together with Mr. Figgins and Mr. Bailey who had both arrived in Sweden to see the tug set off with the dry dock in tow .
In   his  written  evidence   Mr.   Curtis  said  that  he  considered   his  instructions amounted to a requirement for an inspection (or survey) for  towage approval only .
He also said that his understanding of the words  "and Condition Survey" in the context of a Towage Approval Survey was  not significantly different to his understanding of the instructions given to  him over the telephone by Mr. Ellis on 1 6 July .
"i.e .
the sole purpose of my instructions was to attend for towage approval of the dock from Falkenburg to Southampton and to assess the condition of the dock to undergo the towage intended only. .
Mr. Curtis drew up a report of his inspection of the dry dock and dating it 11 August 1997, sent it to Everards under cover a fax sheet of 13 August entitled "Re Towage of Floating Dry-dock Sweden to Portland (Dorset)" .
The relevant content of the fax was ".......herewith towage condition details for the above......" Everards faxed that on to Swire Blanch whose Matthew Pike then took it to Mr. Walker\'s box on 14 August .
Mr. Walker was away on holiday but his deputy Mr. Tate read Mr. Curtis\'s report at Mr. Pike\'s request and, then, also at Mr. Pike\'s request, signed the Everard\'s fax, "Noted and Agreed" .
Owners subsequently paid the premium charged by Mr. Walker of \xc2\xa38250, being 1 % (\xc2\xa36000) for 12 months cover and .375% (\xc2\xa32,250) for (as it turned out) a single tow .
On 21 August 1997 the dock arrived at Portland and made fast to the Outer Coaling Pier .
In September two dumb barges were added to the cover; so was a workboat in October .
After the sinking on 10 November, Everard\'s suggested that an underwriter\'s surveyor should attend .
After some hesitation, underwriters decided to use Peter Curtis since he knew about and had inspected the dock .
Divers were in attendance and Mr. Curtis tried unsuccessfully to raise the dock by running the pumps .
He decided to invite tenders from salvors for raising the dock and reporting on the damage: he later recommended that a tender from Smit Tak should be accepted .
Meanwhile the Owners declared an actual or constructive total loss on the basis that a divers\' survey showed that the dock had broken her back .
Underwriters declined to accept notice of abandonment but agreed to put Owners in the same position as if a Writ had been issued and asked for curtain further information such as evidence that the vessel had been certified to comply with Harbour Authority Regulations and what, if any, preparations for heavy weather Owners had made in respect of the dry dock .
Underwriters agreed to bear the cost in the first instance of Smit Tak raising and recovering the wreck and also instructed the Salvage Association to survey the dock, to determine the cause of the sinking and advise on the prospects of repair .
Underwriters wanted to instruct the Salvage Association as fully as possible and asked Mr. Curtis for his condition survey on the telephone .
It then became clear there was no condition survey separate from the towage approval survey .
On 13 December Smit Tak had begun work (including diving and patching, and also pumping operations) but by 7th January 1998 decided that it was no longer feasible to raise the dock by pumping and patching .
In the event the dock had to be cut up on the sea bed before it would be removed; this was done not by Smit Tak but by Scaldis B.V. between 20 April and 21 August 1998 at a cost greater than the limit of \xc2\xa31,000,000 contained in the policy .
Mr. Marshall and Mr. Waite surveyed the dock at various stages between 3rd March and 22nd June on behalf of underwriters and they made various reports .
Meanwhile on 24 December 1997 underwriters had asserted that no condition survey had been performed and that there was a breach of warranty on the part of the Owners with the result that there was no insurance in place .
The reports of Mr. Waite and Mr. Marshall of the Salvage Association on the state of the dock at the time of the sinking were not seriously disputed .
They concluded, and I find, that there was extensive and debilitating corrosion and that there were four areas where ingress to the pontoon deck could have occurred as a result of the wasted condition of the dock .
Those areas were (I summarise pages 32-37 of the Salvage Association Report dated 12 October 1998):- (1)     The bottom shell plating .
These were specific areas where the bottom shell was not watertight viz .
the troughs below the bottom, the port forward areas of No .
7 port tank along the bilge, the No .
6 starboard wing tank, No .
11 port tank and No .
8 starboard centre tank .
The ability of the dock to withstand hydrostatic loads in these areas was compromised .
(2)     The outer wing walls of the structure .
Here the plating was heavily wasted by corrosion between the 2nd and 4th seams (above the height of the pontoon deck) .
Once the pontoon deck was immersed, the watertight integrity of the dock was compromised .
(3)     The pontoon deck plating .
This had been subject to severe corrosion over previous years, but obviously corroded and perforated plates had been doubled and, sometimes, trebled .
This corrosion is not surprising on a dry dock and, since it occurred in a readily visible area, had been largely remedied .
When, however, the dock was immersed, substantial hydrostatic loads had to be borne by the pontoon deck and it is an open question whether the corrosion present would impair the watertight integrity of the dock .
(4)    The internal bulkheads .
Photographs showed that a number of bulkheads were severely and extensively corroded .
When the dock was ballasted, water could therefore migrate to a space adjacent to the space being ballasted .
A "free surface effect" could occur which would affect the stability of the dock .
(5)     Internal stiffeners .
Many internal stiffeners were severely corroded below the level of 4 metres above the pontoon deck .
That seriously affected local strength as well as the overall strength of the dock .
The importance of this is that underwriters argued that these defects were present in Sweden, were not noticed or commented on by Mr. Curtis and would have been revealed if a condition survey had been carried out .
My finding is that these defects were substantially present before the dock left Sweden .
Mr. Curtis did not appreciate the degree of wastage in the bottom shell plating, the outer wing walls, the internal bulkheads and the internal stiffeners because he did not examine them in any detail .
Whether the wastage would have been revealed on a condition survey depends on the nature of the condition survey carried out .
The Issues  .
(1)         Alleged breach of the term relating to the condition survey .
(i)        What type of condition survey did the policy require .
(ii)       Was the condition survey of the required type carried out .
(iii)      If it was not carried out, is there a breach of the term of the policy .
(iv)      Does that constitute a breach of warranty so that the insurance contract was discharged .
(2)        Alleged breach of the term relating to the towage Approval Survey .
(3)        If there was any such breach as alleged was that breach waived by insurers or they are estopped from relying on the breach .
(4)        Non-disclosure of the of the fact that the dock had a leak at the time the insurance contract was made on 22 July 1997 .
(1)    (i)     Type of Condition Survey required by the policy .
The term "condition survey" is not a term of art .
The question of its meaning in this particular insurance contract is thus a question of construction of the contract on which I would not normally expect to hear evidence going beyond the matrix of the contract, save for any evidence legitimately called to identify the proferor of the phrase "condition survey" for the purpose of the  contra proferentem  principle .
This last evidence was not controversial since Mr. Walker accepted (and indeed alleged) that the requirement for a condition survey was something that was added to the brokers\' original draft at his own insistence .
If, therefore, there is any ambiguity about the expression, it is to be resolved against him and in favour of the insured .
As far as the matrix of the contract is concerned, I find that both Mr. Ellis of Everard\'s and Mr. Suckling of Swire Blanch (the Lloyd\'s brokers) were acting on behalf of the assured in the usual way in their dealings with Mr. Walker of the Coffey Syndicate and Mr. Shrimpton of the Cox Syndicate .
Both the brokers and the underwriters were experienced in marine insurance and were operating in a market where the concept of a "condition survey" had a relevant history .
Before 1991 it was not commonplace for marine underwriters to require a condition  survey for the purposes of a hull and machinery policy; they  would normally rely on a vessel being in class as a sufficient  protection for their interests .
Condition surveys were, however,  by no means unknown .
The Salvage Association (which was  generally regarded in the market as acting on insurers\' behalf)  were from time to time asked to  perform them  and,  in the  booklet they issued in  1979 for surveyors employed by the  Association, there was a section devoted to such surveys as  well   as   a   section   devoted   to   what   were   called   "warranty  surveys" .
There was also a section dealing with "voyage and  towage approval surveys" .
It was, however, more common in  the years before 1991   for P & I Clubs to require a condition  survey as shown by the introductory series of definitions to a  number of articles collected in a booklet entitled The Nautical  Institute on the Work of a Nautical Surveyor published in 1989  and publicly available thereafter .
This defines a condition survey  as "A survey of a vessel\'s machinery and/or hull in particular, or generally, and of the equipment on board to establish the condition and, perhaps, fitness to trade of the vessel .
Often required by Protecting and Indemnity (P & I) Clubs, prior to a vessel being entered with the Club, or at regular intervals during entry, or alternatively at the time any Vessel reaches a predetermined age - sometimes 16 years. .
After  1989 various problems emerged in the market in  relation to losses of bulk carriers (including tankers); hull and  machinery   underwriters   also   took   advantage   of   a   certain  hardening of the market in their favour and started to require a  structural condition survey by the use of a structural condition  warranty clause .
The Joint Hull Committee issued a notice (JH  722) in December 1991  with the aim of setting a faster pace  than   had   previously   prevailed   towards   improving   safety;   it  stated that independent surveys of suspect vessels were the  only practical  answer and  that the  Salvage Association  was  currently drawing up a set of Guidelines for the performance of  what the Committee called "Structural Condition Surveys" .
The  notice continued "The survey will be very thorough and will entail the vessel being empty of cargo and available for a period of at least three days, but probably longer depending on the condition of the vessel .
The survey will concentrate on the likely vulnerable areas of the structure of the vessel and will include thickness gauging of hull plates and frames .
Nevertheless  the  surveyor  will   not  neglect  the  other requirements of a normal condition survey .... .
In order to incorporate Underwriters requirements within the policy conditions the attached Structural Condition Warranty has been drawn up with the help and advice of the Technical and Clauses Committee. .
A   draft   of   a   clause   expressly   called   "Structural   Condition  Warranty"   was   indeed   attached;   that   requires   a   Structural  Condition Survey to be carried out by the Salvage Association  after     cargo     has     been     completely     discharged .
Any  recommendations are to be complied with and such compliance  has to be certified by the Salvage Association .
On the evidence before me there was in 1991  no lesser  standard warranty relating to a "condition survey" as such but  underwriters began to call for condition surveys with the option  for the   attending  surveyor  to   recommend   an   upgrade  to  a  structural    condition    survey .
An    appropriate    clause    was  produced in 1993 by the Joint Hull Committee in the following  terms :- "CONDITION SURVEY WARRANTY (JH 115) Warranted vessel be subject to a Condition Survey, at owner\'s expense, by the Salvage Association within thirty days and all recommendations complied with .
It being understood that the surveyor\'s recommendations may include the necessity that this survey be upgraded to a Structural Condition Survey (JH 722) as per warranty attached. .
This form of warranty was then amended in March 1994 to enable underwriters to receive a copy of the Salvage Association\'s recommendations and/or reports (JH 115A) .
JH 722 contemplated that the association would issue Guidance Notes in relation to structural condition surveys for both their own and non-Association surveyors .
What in fact happened was that the Association did produce Guidance Notes but they were private to Salvage Association surveyors and were not to be released either to shipowners or non-Association surveyors .
There were, however, complementary notes for shipowners in relation to preparations required for a JH 722 survey .
Once JH 115 had come into regular use, underwriters inclined to prefer it to JH 722 and in July 1994, the Salvage Association issued a new set of Guidance Notes to their own surveyors for, as they described them, "Condition surveys other than JH 722" .
Again they were not publicly available .
It is against this background that the words "Towage approval Survey - applies to both tows - and condition survey to be performed by Surveyor Peter Curtiss and all recommendations complied with prior to sailing" fall to be construed .
It is at once apparent that none of the standard forms approved by Joint Hull Committee was being used, that there is no reference to a structural condition survey and that the survey is to be performed by a nominated surveyor who is not expressed to be a member or employee of the Salvage Association .
(As a matter of fact, Mr. Curtis was not an employee of the Salvage Association and did not get any Guidance Notes, although he had done occasional damage surveys at the Association\'s request in the past) .
Mr Teare Q.C .
for the Owners submitted that the expression \'condition survey\' had no fixed or uniform meaning; that it could mean (1)     that the condition of the dock was to be surveyed for the purposes of the tow; (2)     that a survey of the  condition  of the dock  (including  its  machinery and equipment) was to be earned out as far as  possible with a noting  of areas which  were inaccessible,  without any expression of judgment by the surveyor as to  the    reasonableness    of    the    risk    to    the    assured    by  underwriters; (3)    that the condition of the dock was to be surveyed and the  surveyor was to exercise a judgment as to whether the dock  was fit to operate as a floating dry dock .
He submitted that all these view were reasonable and possible, that Mr.  Curtis had adopted the first construction as correct (with Owners\' expert  Mr. Hart adopting the second and Insurers\' expert Mr. Waite adopting the  third), that the clause was ambiguous and that the ambiguity should be  resolved against the insurer and the first possible construction was the  correct one for this case .
What was not reasonable or possible was  insurers\'   pleaded   construction   which   amounted   to   a   full   structural  condition survey which was precisely what the clause did not require .
Mr. Reeder Q.C.. for Insurers submitted that one must have regard to the purpose for which the survey of the condition was required .
The towage approval survey was a survey to approve the vessel as fit to be towed; the condition survey could not relate to towage but must relate to suitability (viz .
seaworthiness) for the remainder of the risk while the dry dock was in use in port after the comparatively short period of the tow .
Mr. Reeder did not support his pleaded case in its extreme form but did submit that, if the surveyor felt that he could not do an adequate condition survey without e.g .
inspecting and ultrasonically testing every tank (which would mean that each tank would have first to be cleaned in readiness) then the dock owner would have to do whatever was required .
It will be noted that both sets of submissions fasten on the purpose of the condition survey in order to ascertain what is contractually required .
In my judgment they are right to do so, because unless one can focus on its purpose it is not all easy to judge what is required .
Once one accepts that it is necessary to consider the purpose of the survey, it must follow that the purpose of the condition survey must be some purpose in addition to the survey for towage approval purposes - otherwise there would be little point in requiring a condition survey in addition to a towage approval survey .
It is, of course, true that it may be necessary to inspect and form an opinion about various aspects of the condition of the vessel for the purposes of giving towage approval; if so, that would all be part of a towage approval survey .
The requirement for a condition survey in the present case must, however, be a requirement for some purpose in addition to the purposes of towage approval .
That purpose can only relate to the requirement for cover of 12 months by way of port risks .
This is all the more likely if (as I find) both the broker, Mr. Suckling, and the leading underwriter, Mr. Walker, knew that the vessel was not classed, albeit that there was a warranty that it was or would be certified to be in accordance with Harbour Authority Regulations .
I conclude, therefore, that term "condition survey" in the declaration scratched by Mr. Walker and Mr. Shrimpton meant a survey of the condition of the vessel for the purposes of determining whether it was seaworthy for a 1 2 months port risks cover .
(1)    (ii)      Was a Condition Survey of the required type carried out .
The only possible answer to this question is that it was not .
Mr. Curtis has always accepted that he did not carry out a survey to assess the seaworthiness of the vessel as an operating dry dock during the period of cover .
I have already quoted from his written evidence to the effect that he assessed the condition of the dock only to determine whether it was suitable to undergo the intended towage .
In his written evidence Mr. Curtis accepted that he had not done what he called "a full structural condition survey" and stated that he had not been instructed to do so .
Insofar as this implies that there is no intermediate stage between a survey of the condition of the dry dock for the purposes of towage and a full structural condition survey of the dry dock, I do not consider that correct because JH 115 contemplates just such an intermediate stage .
But, whatever the position as to that, he accepted in his cross-examination that if he had been doing a condition survey for port risks cover, he would have done his survey completely differently because he would then have considered that a structural survey (including ultrasonic testing) was necessary, Mr.  Teare submitted that,  because Mr.  Curtis assessed the condition of the dry dock for the purpose of the intended towage, he had done a condition survey of the kind required by the terms of the declaration .
This submission might have some substance if what was done by way of surveying the ship for the purposes of granting towage approval would inevitably be the same as what would be done by way of surveying for the purposes of spending a year in port operating as a dry dock .
But the expert evidence was that a surveyor would, in fact, do at least some different work for each of the requirements .
The most obvious difference between the towing of a dry dock and its operations is that one would not expect to ballast for a tow when the dry dock will be towed high in the water .
While operating in port as a dry dock, on the other hand, it will often be necessary to sink the dry dock by ballasting it, so that a ship can be positioned on her, and then raise the dock by deballasting it, so that the ship can be repaired and then sink the dock again so that the repaired vessel can float off .
A surveyor inspecting the dry dock to satisfy himself that it can operate safely in port will have to consider likely hydrostatic forces and the ability of the dry dock to withstand them in a way that a surveyor inspecting the dry dock for towage purposes will not .
Mr. Curtis himself agreed that this was the position .
Owners   then   argued   that   (1)   Mr.   Curtis   understood   his instructions as being to survey the condition of the dry dock for the purpose of towage (2) that his instructions were in the same terms as the policy requirement (3) that such an understanding was not an unreasonable one (4) that the policy requirement was therefore ambiguous and {5) that the policy should, therefore, be construed against the underwriter .
This argument falls down both at stage (2) and stage (4) .
It is true that the terms of Mr. Ellis\'s written fax of 18th July instructed Mr. Curtis to "carry out the Underwriters required Towage Approval Survey and Condition Survey" .
But Mr. Curtis gave evidence that in prior telephone conversations Mr. Ellis had talked only of a Towage Approval Survey .
I do not make any positive finding about that partly because I do not need to and partly because Mr. Ellis was too ill to give evidence .
(I received his statement in evidence without objection but he was never cross-examined) .
It is also the case that the heading of Mr. Ellis\'s fax read: "J. Kirkaldy & Sons - Towage of Floating Drydock From Sweden to Southampton Water" thus giving sole emphasis to the towage aspect of the matter .
Mr. Curtis never saw the insurance terms and so was never in a position to consider the meaning of the survey clause as part of the insurance .
Whether his understanding of his instructions was reasonable or unreasonable is not, therefore, a relevant inquiry for me to make; something can obviously be said on both sides about that .
But the argument also breaks down at stage (4).-Even if it were  right to say that Mr. Curtis\'s understanding of his instructions was  reasonable (or not unreasonable) and that those instructions tallied  precisely with the wording of the contract of insurance so that his  understanding   amounted   to   a   reasonable   (or   not   unreasonable)  interpretation of the insurance wording, it does not follow that the  wording is ambiguous so as to require reliance on what I will call the  contra proferentem doctrine .
There must be a true ambiguity before  one can resort to the rule; it would be wrong to create an ambiguity  in order to resort to the rule, see  Cole v Accident Insurance  (1889) 5  TLR 736, 737 per Lindley and Bowen L.JJ .
Similarly it is wrong to  use one person\'s view (however informed he may be) to say that a  term is ambiguous when, in truth, it is not .
As DuParcq J. said in  Passmore v Vulcan Boiler & General Insurance Co. (1936) 54 Lloyd\'s  LR .
92, 93 "If, looking at the policy, the meaning appears to be clear, there is no room for the application of that doctrine. .
As I read this dictum, it is for the judge to decide whether there is any ambiguity and then apply the doctrine .
The fact that a surveyor or even an insurance expert may take a different view of construction does not mean that there is any ambiguity which requires resolution by any doctrine of law .
Mr. Teare further relied on the fact that there was no statement of the purpose of the condition survey and that since both the condition survey and the towage approval survey had to be performed at the same time viz .
"prior to sailing" (with the result that, if the warranty was not complied with, the contract would,  on  sailing, be discharged) both surveys must have had the same purpose viz .
to assess fitness for the tow .
This reads too much into the fact that it must have been contemplated that both surveys were to be done at the same time .
It was also pointed out that the surveyor in Sweden could not know anything about the conditions under which the dry dock would have to operate at Portland .
But the fact that insurers did not require (as they might have done) an operational survey to bo performed before the dry dock began operations in Portland does not mean that they only wanted the condition survey to relate to the dock\'s suitability for tow .
Rather the contrary .
The expert underwriters agreed that most underwriters would regard the tow as more risky than the operations in port .
It does not follow, to my mind, that the requirement for a condition survey in the contract related only to the tow .
The most that could be said to follow is that the condition survey may have been required for both the tow and for port purposes .
Finally it was said that insurers were content to accept the risk of why the dry dock while in Sweden without a condition survey (which was only required prior to sailing and there was, therefore, no reason why the dry dock while in Sweden without a condition survey (which was only required prior to sailing) and there was, therefore, no reason why they should not be prepared to accept the risk of the dry dock while in Portland likewise without a condition survey done for that purpose but only done for the purpose of the towage .
This is not a convincing argument since the parties all thought that the dock would not be operating as a dry dock while in Sweden and would only be there for a short time (during survey and compliance with any recommendations) before sailing to England .
I conclude therefore that what was required by the policy was a survey of the condition of the dry dock with a view to assessing its seaworthiness as an operating dry dock during the period of cover and not merely assessing its suitability for the tow .
To my mind this is consistent with the conclusion reached by Colman J. in the case of a yacht insurance with the clause "Subject to survey including valuation by independent qualified surveyor" in  Zeus Tradition Marine v Bell  (judgment delivered 30 October 1998) .
He held that what was there required was that:- "(i) a survey of the vessel should have been conducted for condition and value by an independent surveyor and (ii) a condition survey should have been satisfactory in the sense that it gave rise to no defects or recommendations in respect of seaworthiness or passenger safety. .
(1)    (iii)     Was there a breach of the policy .
Mr Teare argued that there was no breach of the policy even if a condition survey of the required type was not done .
He submitted (A)    that, on the true construction of the terms of the declaration, the parties had agreed to leave it to Mr. Curtis, as the nominated surveyor, to decide what he should do by way of conducting the towage approval survey and the condition survey and that included deciding how he should interpret his instructions; if therefore he had not performed the required type of survey, that did not constitute a breach of condition (B)     that, as a matter of market practice, the nominated surveyor was regarded as acting on behalf of underwriters and that, if there was a failure on the part of Mr. Curtis to do a condition survey of the required type, that failure occurred while he was acting "for" underwriters who could not complain that the requirement of a condition survey was not satisfied .
(A)    " Leaving it" to the surveyor  .
It is not uncommon for parties to a contract to agree to leave the performance of an obligation under the contract to a third party .
When what is left to a third party is a survey, that will require the third party to exercise his skill and judgment   in  the  execution   of   his  task;   he   may   have  to exercise his discretion or his judgment in deciding what parts of the vessel to examine, what testing to do and many other matters .
It may be that, in such cases, the parties do not intend that a court should examine minutely or at all the decisions made by a surveyor in the course of his survey in order to determine whether the survey was defective (when judged by an objective standard) or indeed whether it was so defective as not to amount to a survey at all .
Mr. Teare submitted that it was no part of the court\'s function to second-guess what the surveyor does or to compare what he does to any objective standard .
Mr. Reeder\'s final resting-place on this aspect of the case was that for a surveyor to fail to do something essential for the purpose of a survey will vitiate the survey to such an extent that it will not constitute a survey at all, while doing something essential in the wrong way will not mean that no survey at all is done .
Mr. Reeder\'s submission opens up almost as many questions as it resolves - how does one decide what is "essential" for the purposes of a survey .
In what is a difficult area, it is appropriate to obtain assistance from those cases where parties to a contract have agreed that relevant decisions in the course of a contract are to be made by a third party such as an expert of one kind or another e.g .
a valuer or independent chartered accountant .
A surveyor whose duty is to examine a piece of property, make any necessary recommendations and ensure such recommendations are complied with is not, of course, quite the same as an expert entrusted with making a final decision but the analogy is a moderately close one at any rate where the expert is not acting as an arbitrator .
This area of the law has been somewhat beset with (1) the difficulties that can arise if the expert makes a mistake of law and (2) a consideration of the question whether a question of construction is a question of law, but the current state of the law seems to be that if a decision is left to an expert and that decision requires the solution of a question of construction the court will not examine the question of construction for itself .
The way it was put by Knox J. in  Nikko Hotels (UK) Ltd. v M.E.P.C .
Plc .
[1991] 2 E.G.L.R .
103 was as follows:- "If parties agree to refer to the final and conclusive judgment of an expert an issue which either consists of a question of construction or necessarily involves the solution of a question of construction, the expert\'s decision will be final and conclusive and, therefore, not open to review or treatment by the courts as a nullity on the ground that the expert\'s decision on construction was erroneous in law, unless it can be shown that the expert has not performed the task assigned to him .
If he has answered the right question in the wrong way, his decision will be binding .
If he has answered the wrong question, his decision will be a nullity in that case. .
After making  allowance  for the  context of the  accountant being  required  in the   Nikko   case to  make  a final  decision which would bind the parties (which is not, at any rate expressly, paralleled in the clause which I have to construe), I think that the approach of Knox J. can afford useful guidance in this case .
The passage I have cited has been followed by the Court of Appeal in both  The Glacier Bay  [1996] 1 Lloyd\'s Rep. 370, 377-8 per Neill L.J .
and  Brown v G10 Insurance  [1998] Lloyd\'s I & R Reports 201, 209 per Chadwick L.J .
This approach enabled Mr. Teare to submit that, when Mr. Curtis misinterpreted his instructions, he was making a decision on a question of construction which was within the ambit of what the parties agreed that he should do and that, therefore, there was no breach of the clause in the insurance contract .
That does not seem to me to be correct .
Mr. Curtis did not in the present case answer the right question in the wrong way .
He did not ask the right question at all or, to use Knox J\'s phrase, he answered the wrong question .
He answered the question whether the condition of the dry dock was fit for towage across the North Sea; he never answered the correct question viz .
whether the condition of the dry dock was suitable for coverage for 12 months under a port risks policy .
I do not consider that the fact that Mr. Curtis decided that all he needed to do was a towage approval survey means that there is no breach of the terms of the declaration of insurance .
Acting "for" underwriters  .
On this question I heard expert evidence from Mr. Outhwaite for the Owners and Mr. Luben for the insurers both experienced marine underwriters (although Mr. Outhwaite has now retired) .
This evidence became admissible by virtue of Owners\' plea (para 8.5 of Amended Reply) that it was usual or customary underwriting practice to regard surveyors, nominated in the insurance contract to carry out towage approval, condition or other surveys, as acting on behalf of and with the authority of underwriters .
On the evidence I was not able to conclude that there was any such usual or customary practice as regards non-Salvage Association surveyors .
Of course, in one sense a nominated surveyor, although paid by the vessel\'s owners (as he was in this case), is looking after underwriters\' interests, because the underwriters do not wish to insure a vessel which has not passed whatever type of survey it is that the underwriters require; but it is a far cry from that to say that underwriters\' accept responsibility for anything and everything done by the surveyor named in the insurance contract .
Mr. Outhwaite did not suggest in his oral evidence that underwriters would be liable if the nominated surveyor damaged the ship and he was quite clear that, if no condition survey of the kind required by the contract was done, the terms of the insurance were not complied with .
It would be odd indeed if the surveyor were to have authority to vary the contract of insurance .
I conclude therefore, that the condition of the declaration requiring the performance of a condition survey was not complied with and that, to that extent, there was a breach of the terms of the contract of insurance .
(1)    (iv)       Breach of warranty  .
Mr Teare accepted that the term requiring performance of towage approval and condition surveys was a warranty and that non-compliance with that warranty discharged the contract .
The slight curiosity is that the term is contained in the declaration under the head "Conditions" while there is a separate head for "Warranties" .
Normally that might lead to the conclusion that the survey term was not a warranty in the technical marine insurance sense .
But that is not a matter of any consequence since the "Condition" only makes sense if it is construed as a condition precedent to insurers\' liability - in other words insurers are not liable unless the relevant surveys have been performed .
As Lord Goff of Chieveley said in  The Good Luck  [1992] 1 A.C. 233, 263A "fulfilment of the warranty is a condition precedent to the liability of the insurer. .
(2)  Towage Approval Survey  .
I permitted insurers to make a late amendment to their Points of Defence to allege that no towage approval survey had been performed, despite the fact the insurers\' solicitors had expressly accepted in January of 1998 that there had been just such a towage approval survey .
At first sight the allegation is a little surprising because there is no dispute that (whatever else he may or may not have done) Mr. Curtis at least purported to perform a towage approval survey .
He even provided a report (not required by the clause) which said in the final sentence:- "it is considered that the floating dry dock has been properly prepared and is fit for towage from Falkenburg to Portland. .
The dry dock, of course, survived the tow without damage .
Mr. Reeder alleged that the towage approval survey was nevertheless defective because Mr. Curtis failed to do any testing for strength which was an essential part of a proper towage approval survey .
This had the merit of being consistent (as an allegation) with the way that Mr. Reeder put the insurers\' case as set out in (1) (iii) (A) above .
But I have rejected that way of putting the case as being capable of proving a breach of the survey clause in the declaration .
In this respect Mr. Curtis answered the right question - he conducted a towage approval survey as required .
In case I am wrong about that I should say whether testing for strength is an essential part of a towage approval survey .
On this I had the expert evidence of Mr. Hart for the Owners and Mr. Waite of the Salvage Association for the insurers .
They both agreed that it was an important part of any towage approval survey of a dry dock to test it for its ability to withstand environmental loads during the course of the tow, particularly longitudinal bending movements imposed by sea swell and waves .
For this purpose it would be necessary to do theoretical calculations on the basis of the as-built drawings of the dry dock, if available, or (if not available) on the basis of a mid-ship section modulus which would have to be built for the purpose .
Mr. Curtis did consider the wave strengths likely to be encountered in an August crossing of the North Sea but did not do any theoretical calculations .
He was not given any drawings to enable him to do such calculations nor did he make (or cause to be made) a mid-ship section modulus .
When asked how he was satisfied the dock would survive the tow he said "I just had a feeling it would" .
He took a calculated risk and got away with it .
On the expert evidence I am satisfied that it is not good practice to do a towage approval survey without doing theoretical stress calculations .
Unfortunately neither expert was asked in terms whether such theoretical calculations were an "essential" part of a towage approval survey because Mr .
Reader had not by that stage formulated his statement of principle .
Mr. Reeder also submitted that Mr. Curtis never did a survey which would establish that the dry dock had sufficient strength in fact, because he did not enter a sufficient number of tanks and inspect in each tank .
He only entered two of the port side wing tanks and did not examine the starboard wing tanks at all nor the bottom tanks below the pontoon deck (because there was a vessel on the pontoon deck during his survey) .
Mr. Curtis was again criticised for failing to examine a sufficient number of tanks for the purpose of his towage approval survey .
Adopting the language of Knox J. in Nikko, it seems to me that examining an insufficient number of tanks is doing the right thing in the wrong way or to an insufficient extent rather than failing to do something essential to the concept of a towage approval survey .
The small number of tanks examined is, however, relevant to the question of doing stress calculations .
If the position is that (for whatever reason) only a small number of tanks can be examined, it becomes all the more important to do stress calculations; conversely, stress calculations may be less important if an examination of a large number of tanks is enough to show that the dry dock is sufficiently strong to withstand a contemplated towage .
If, therefore, Mr. Reeder\'s test were the right test in law I would conclude in this case that, in the light of Mr. Curtis\'s ability to enter and examine only the port side wing tanks, stress calculations were essential and that a failure to do such calculations was a failure to do an essential part of a towage approval survey .
As it is, however, my view is that Mr. Curtis did, in fact, do a towage approval survey .
The fact that such a survey can be criticised is nothing to the point .
There is, therefore, no breach of the survey clause in the contract of insurance in this particular respect .
(3)  Waiver/Estoppel Mr. Teare submitted that if no condition survey had been performed with the result that the contract of insurance was discharged on sailing, the contract came back into effect as a result of Mr. Tate\'s noting and agreeing of Mr. Curtis\'s report on 14 August while Mr. Walker was away on holiday .
It was pointed out that, after that, insurers accepted premium and agreed to add dumb barges and a workboat to the policy .
In these circumstances it was said that insurers knew there had been no condition survey and, having expressed no concern at these differing stages, they represented that its absence did not matter .
They were therefore estopped from now asserting that it did matter and from relying on the fact that the contract was discharged at the time of sailing .
As I have already indicated Mr. Walker did not know the position until about 15 December when either he or Mr. Tate telephoned Mr. Curtis and asked for a copy of the Condition Survey and Mr. Curtis said he had not done one .
Section 33 of the Marine Insurance Act provides for the insurer to be discharged from liability as from the date of breach of warranty .
It is therefore, apparent that no question of election arises although by Section 34 (3) the insurers may waive the breach .
Since the breach of warranty does not give rise to any election by the insurer e.g .
to choose to keep the contract on foot, the doctrine of waiver by election has no application .
The Owners must rely on the doctrine of waiver by estoppel, see Clarke,  Law of Insurance Contracts  2nd ed .
para 20-7A,  MacGillivray,   Law of Insurance  .
9th ed .
paras 10-96 to 10-98 .
Owners must, therefore, show a representation by words or conduct that insurers would not rely on the requirement of a condition survey .
It seems to me that the Owners cannot show this .
The mere fact  that  Mr.   Tate  read  Mr.   Curtis\'s  Towage  Approval  Survey  and  wrote  "Noted & agreed" on Everard\'s fax beneath Everard\'s words:- "We attach for your records, copy of fax from surveyor re towage approval. .
cannot be the equivalent of saying \'we accept that the absence of a  condition survey doesn\'t matter\' .
Neither can any later conduct by the  insurers be so construed .
The clause did not require the survey or surveys  to be shown to  underwriters;  no insurer (let alone his deputy)  can be  expected to carry in his mind all the terms of all the insurances currently  operative .
It will only be if the insurer (or his deputy) addressed his mind  to the question of the absence of a coalition survey that any unequivocal  representation could begin to arise .
As it is, once underwriters became  aware that Mr. Curtis had not done a condition survey, they were quick to  say that there was no cover .
Non-Disclosure  .
In the light of my decision on breach of warranty, underwriters do not need the defence .
I should, however, make some short findings .
The original allegation related to the condition of the vessel as a whole but Mr. Reeder soon appreciated that Kirkaldy could not be expected to be aware of deficiencies that even the surveyor did not find .
Of course Mr. Curtis only examined the dry dock, in any event, after the insurance contract had been concluded and Mr. Reeder accepted that he could only rely on matters shown to Mr. Figgins at the time when the contract was made .
He accordingly applied for leave to amend to allege that Owners had not disclosed the fact (known to them) that the dry dock leaked from an unknown source and required to be pumped about every 2 days for about 10-20 minutes .
I gave leave .
This was the only allegation pursued in Mr. Reeder\'s final address .
I have already found that when Mr. Figgins went to look at the dock in March 1997 he and Mr. Vincent were informed that there was a leak and that the dock required pumping every 2 days or so for about 10 -15 minutes .
They were not surprised at this information relating to such an old dry dock .
The question is whether this was material to be disclosed; if this leak meant that the dry dock was or might be unseaworthy, that would normally be a matter which required disclosure .
But underwriters were obviously not relying on what the insured did or did not disclose to them in this respect because they required both a towage approval survey and a condition survey .
If the condition survey was required for the purpose of determining whether the vessel was fit for 12 months cover in port, then it seems to me self-evident the warranty of the condition survey rendered it superfluous to disclose matters which would be found and, if necessary dealt with by way of recommendation; on this basis, however, the underwriters are in any event not liable in this case .
The same considerations apply even if (contrary to my view) Mr. Teare were correct that the required condition survey was only to see if the dry dock was fit for towage; indeed the presence of a leak and the possible resulting unseaworthiness were, if anything, more material to the tow across the North Sea than to use in port .
Once again the underwriter who stipulated for a condition survey relies on the surveyor rather than the assured to deal with any unseaworthiness of the vessel and so it was, in my view, unnecessary to disclose the existence of the leak by reason of the warranty as to a survey by an independent surveyor .
Section 18 (3)(d) of the Marine Insurance Act applies .
In fact, of course, Mr. Curtis was told that the vessel did require pumping 1 5 minutes or so every other day .
He assumed it was not serious; Mr. Figgins can hardly be criticised for taking the same view .
This was certainly the view of Mr. Outhwaite (whose evidence on this aspect of the matter I preferred to that of Mr. Luben) and even Mr. Walker said he would not expect an owner to put forward his own opinion on the condition of the dock in general (or, I infer) on the question whether the dock was seaworthy .
I also consider that if the broker had mentioned a leak which required attention for 10 -15 minutes every 2 days Mr. Walker would still have written the risk, relying on the surveyor to deal with it as he thought right .
In these circumstances I do not consider that a defence of nondisclosure is available to the insurers, but they are entitled to decline liability due to the absence of a condition survey .
There will, therefore, be judgment for the Defendant .
In many ways I am sorry to reach that conclusion .
Mr. Figgins has no experience himself of the marine insurance market and will, no doubt, feel he has been let down by his advisers .
But sympathy for the Owners cannot divert me from applying what seems to me the right construction of the contract which has been made with marine underwriters on his behalf.  .
